One of the most widely domesticated fowls is the chicken. It is raised worldwide for its meat and eggs. The chicken belongs to the group of domesticated birds called poultry, which also includes turkeys, ducks, geese, guinea fowl, and pigeons. The scientific name of the domestic chicken is Gallus gallus. Its ancestor is the wild red jungle fowl.

The chicken is a heavy-bodied bird adapted to life on the ground. The short wings are not suited for long-distance flight, and the legs and toes are adapted for running and scratching. It has a short, stout, curved beak. The female, called a hen, is usually drab. Both the male (rooster) and the female have one or two wattles—naked, fleshy growths hanging from the chin or throat—and a large comb, or crest, of similar tissue.

Hens are raised for meat and for their edible eggs; farmers have developed numerous breeds and varieties to fulfill commercial requirements. Most immature males are castrated (in modern times usually through the use of chemicals, which damage the testicles) to become meat birds, called capons. Mature males have long been used for sport, although the practice of cockfighting is now banned in some countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom.

The breeds of chickens raised for their meat and eggs are generally categorized into four classes—American, English, Mediterranean, and Asian. The American breeds are called dual-purpose breeds because they are suited for both meat and egg production. They are large and well-fleshed and lay brown-shelled eggs. Major breeds are the Rhode Island Red, a red-feathered bird with a long, rectangular body; the Plymouth Rock, of which there are several varieties, all with long, fairly broad bodies; and the New Hampshire (bred from Rhode Island Red stock), a meaty, medium-long bird with light red feathers.

The English breeds are valued for the quality of their meat. Popular breeds are the Cornish, a compact, meaty bird often used in crossbreeding programs for broiler production; the Orpington, a long-bodied breed that includes buff, black, white, and blue varieties; and the Sussex, an excellent meat producer with a long body and broad shoulders. All English breeds except the Cornish have white skins.

Birds of the Asian class are large, meaty birds with loose feathers and feathered shanks. Their main commercial disadvantage is that they grow slowly; however, they are popular exhibition birds. The major breed is the Brahma, which has three varieties.

The Mediterranean breeds are smaller than others and are primarily egg layers. The breed of greatest commercial significance, the Leghorn, has numerous varieties, but the White Leghorn is more popular than all the other types combined. This breed is the world’s leading egg producer. Other Mediterranean breeds are the White Minorca, which is often used in crossbreeding for egg production, and the Anacona. All Mediterranean breeds lay white-shelled eggs.

Breeds of exhibition poultry belong primarily to other classes, though there are exhibition types in all poultry breeds. Exhibition birds are entered in poultry shows, where they are judged on appearance. The standards for all recognized breeds of poultry are specified in the American Standard of Perfection, published by the American Poultry Association.

Although chickens have been domesticated for about 4,000 years, only in about 1800 did the meat and eggs start to become mass-produced. Modern high-volume poultry farms began to proliferate in Great Britain around 1920 and in the United States after World War II. These farms often contain large buildings with rows of stacked cages. The chickens are kept indoors so that the levels of heat, light, and humidity can be controlled.

Hens can lay some 250 eggs a year. If a hen mates with a rooster before laying eggs, the eggs will be fertilized and will develop into chicks. But hens can lay eggs without mating. These unfertilized eggs are the eggs that people eat.

Fertilized eggs produced by breeding flocks are incubated in large incubators that are intended to reproduce the natural conditions provided by a setting hen. The incubator maintains a warm, even temperature of between 98.1° and 100.4 °F (36.7° and 38 °C) and provides a steady supply of fresh, slightly moist air. The eggs in the incubator are turned every one to three hours, just as a setting hen carefully turns its eggs from time to time. The chicks hatch after 21 days. The sex of day-old chicks can be determined by examining their rudimentary sex organs or by noting differences in the color or length of their feathers.

