 Cranes are tall, graceful, wading birds. Through the still waters of open marshlands the sandhill crane wades on stiltlike legs. Its long neck erect, it scans the countryside with keen eyes for signs of danger. Then it lowers its head and searches the water. Out darts its neck, and its long daggerlike beak holds a frog or a salamander, which it swallows in one or two gulps. At other times it seems to prefer dry land and can be seen striding across fields, catching lizards, mice, and grasshoppers, or making a meal of grain.

Among the wariest of birds, it detects the faintest sound or sight of danger. With a few long running strides, it takes slowly to the air, flapping its wings in a lazy rhythm. It always flies with its neck and legs stretched out in line with its body. At the same time it utters a booming tremulous call that can be heard long after it has flown out of sight.

This haunting, trumpetlike voice is produced in a remarkable windpipe, the first part of which is coiled and twisted like a hunting horn within the keel of the breastbone. From the lungs to the throat this windpipe may be fully five feet long.

In spring, the male cranes bow and strut before the females in a dance of courtship that resembles an old-fashioned minuet. The female lays only two or, rarely, three eggs a season in a nest that is often no more than a depression in the ground, lined with grass and weed stems. When the young hatch, they are completely covered with a full coat of soft, fluffy down. They are sturdy and can run about within a few hours after hatching. When autumn comes, they are strong enough to join the long flight to their winter grounds with the adults.

Cranes are often mistaken for herons, but they differ from herons in several ways. The crane has compact plumage that grows close to its body and looks almost smooth. The heron has fluffy plumage and long, fine feathers that give it a wispy appearance. Both birds have three front toes and one back toe, but the back toe of the crane is higher on the leg than the front toes. All the toes of the heron are on the same level. When a crane flies, it stretches its neck forward and holds it straight out in front. The heron folds its neck so that its head is pulled back and held close to its body.

Cranes form the family Gruidae. Of the 18 species known, two are North American. The sandhill crane, whose scientific name is Grus canadensis, is brownish gray and has a red face. It stands up to 4 feet (more than 1 meter) tall. Its breeding grounds range from northeastern California, Wisconsin, and Michigan to southern Canada.

The two subspecies of the sandhill crane are the Florida crane, found in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana, and the little brown crane, which nests as far north as Alaska and overwinters from California and Texas southward into Mexico. Sandhill cranes were long threatened by extinction. Strict conservation laws and the establishment of protected areas for breeding have saved these birds.

The whooping crane (Grus americana) is the tallest, and one of the rarest, of North American birds. It is white, with black wing tips, and has a red cap and face. It grows more than 4 feet tall and has a 7-foot (2-meter) wingspread. This bird breeds in Wood Buffalo Park, in northern Alberta, and winters on the Aransas Wildlife Refuge in Texas.

The European crane (G. grus), an ashy-gray bird with a black throat and face, grows about 4 feet tall. The crowned crane (Balearica pavonina) of Africa, about the same size, is named for the high tuft of yellow feathers that tops its head. Another African crane is the blue crane (Anthropoides paradiseus), the national bird of South Africa. Australia’s “native companion” (G. rubicunda), called brolga by Aboriginal peoples, is a large gray crane with a red patch on the back of its head. It is often seen in the furrows close behind plowmen, where it gulps down insects disturbed by the plowing.
