Introduction 

The crane is a tall, graceful, wading bird. In Asian countries it is a symbol of long life and happiness.

Where Cranes Live

Most cranes are migratory, which means they travel from one place to another depending on the season. Cranes live on every continent except Antarctica and South America.

Physical Features

Cranes are tall birds. For example, the whooping crane is more than 4 feet (1.2 meters) tall and has a wingspan of 7 feet (2.1 meters). It is white with black wing tips and has a red cap and face.

Cranes have feathers that grow close to their bodies and look smooth. They have three front toes and one back toe, with the back toe higher on the leg than the front toes. When a crane flies, it stretches its neck forward and holds it out in front. Cranes make a piercing, trumpetlike call that can be heard long after they have flown out of sight. This call comes from the crane’s windpipe, which is coiled and twisted like a horn.

Behaviour

Cranes eat a wide variety of food, such as small animals, fish, insects, frogs, salamanders, lizards, mice, grasshoppers, grass shoots, and even grains. They perform courtship dances by hopping and flapping their wings while making their calls.

Reproduction

Male cranes usually begin courting female cranes in the spring. Female cranes usually lay two or sometimes three shiny olive-gray eggs with brown spots. The nest is in the ground and lined with grass, reeds, rushes, or stems. The same nest may be used year after year. The young are covered with a full coat of soft, fluffy, brown down. They begin running around within a few hours of hatching. By autumn the young are strong enough to join the long flight to their winter grounds with the adults.

Threats to Cranes

Many kinds of cranes are endangered because of hunting and habitat destruction. The North American whooping crane was quite common at the beginning of the 20th century but is now so rare that it is protected in special areas in Wisconsin and Texas. Strict laws and protected areas for breeding have saved these birds.
