Crows, ravens, and jays are birds of the family Corvidae. Also included in this family are the magpies, jackdaws, and rooks and many lesser-known forms such as the bush-crow and pied crow of Africa and notch-tailed tree pie of Southeast Asia.

Most members of the Corvidae are large loud-calling birds with strong bills. The males characteristically help build their nests and feed their young. Representatives live on all of the continents that are not very cold and on most large islands.

The common American crow, whose scientific name is Corvus brachyrhynchos, is a glossy black bird about 20 inches (50 centimeters) in length with a fan-shaped tail. The sexes look identical. Its usual call is a loud “caw-caw.” It lives in all of eastern and most of western North America. This crow’s habitat includes wooded areas, farmland, and even suburban areas. It is found as far north as the Arctic Circle and as far south as Florida, the Gulf Coast, and northern Mexico. Crows do not migrate long distances, but thousands will sometimes spend their nights at a common center, dispersing each morning to their various feeding grounds.

Crows mate in early spring and build large stick nests in the tops of tall trees. While the female sits on the four to six dull green eggs with dark brown spots, the male provides her with food for herself and their chicks. Crow chicks eat ravenously, and both parents are kept busy with feeding. Because of their appetites for a wide variety of plant and animal foods, crows are a nuisance to farmers and compete with other wildlife for food. Crows feed on agricultural crops such as fruits, corn, and other grains. But they also consume enormous numbers of insects, including harmful pests. They have also been known to eat baby birds, rabbits, mice, and snakes.

Crows are considered to be among the most intelligent birds. Some young crows will become entertaining pets and can be taught to perform simple tricks. Pet crows have even been taught to “talk” like parrots. They are also thieves that will steal any little trinket or shiny object, a trait that must be guarded against in a household with a pet crow.

The fish crow (C. ossifragus) is a coastal bird of the United States that is usually smaller but looks much like the common crow. Fish crows feed in aquatic areas and can be distinguished from other crows by their more nasal “caw.”

Ravens (C. corax) are the largest members of the crow family, ranging up to about 26 inches (66 centimeters) in length. They are black birds that are found in many parts of North America, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Ravens do not gather in large numbers as crows do, often remaining in pairs or even alone for much of the year.
blue jay
Sherrie Tucker/© New Hampshire Division of Travel and Tourism Development
Sherrie Tucker/© New Hampshire Division of Travel and Tourism Development

Jays are found in nearly all parts of the world, mostly in forests. The blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata) of eastern North America is about 11 inches (28 centimeters) in length. It is clear blue above with white markings on the wings, a black ring around the neck, and a large head crest.

Blue jays are loud, bold birds that attract attention wherever they are. They will physically defend their young from attacks of cats, dogs, or even humans. Their common call is a loud “jay-jay” but sometimes they voice a clear, bell-like, two-syllable song. They feed on seeds, fruits, and insects and will eat the eggs or young of other birds. A blue jay’s nest is woven of twigs and lined with bark and roots. They typically lay four to six eggs that are olive green or brown, spotted with cinnamon brown.

Steller’s jay (Cyanocitta stelleri), which is found in the coniferous forests of western North America, is larger than the blue jay and is an indigo blue with a high head crest. The scrub jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens) is a blue, crestless jay that lives in sandy, scrub oak areas in Florida and in the western United States and Mexico. The green jay (Cyanocorax yncas) of the lower Rio Grande region is a small jay with spectacular colors. Its body and tail are bright green with some yellow on its sides. Its head, throat, and breast are black, but its crown and cheeks are a bright blue.

The gray jay (Perisoreus canadensis), formerly called the Canada jay, is commonly known as a “camp robber” for its daring raids on campers’ food supplies. The gray jay lives in coniferous forests from Alaska to the Atlantic coast and south to New Mexico in the western United States.
Magpies, Jackdaws, and Rooks

Black-billed magpies (Pica pica) are handsome birds ranging in length from 17 to 22 inches (44 to 56 centimeters), with striking black and white plumage and long black tails. Their call is a rasping “cack, cack” and scolds and gabbles mixed with whistling notes. From this call comes the expression “chattering magpie.” The species lives in western North America, Europe, and much of Asia. The smaller yellow-billed magpie (P. nuttalli) lives in California. The green magpie (Cissa chinensis) is a colorful species that lives from India to Borneo.

Magpies take great care in building their nests, which are fully enclosed except for a single entrance hole in one side. The roof is woven from thorny sticks that protect from attack by other birds. They are easily tamed. But, like crows, they are crafty thieves that will carry away bright objects of any kind.

Jackdaws (Corvus monedula) and rooks (C. frugilegus) are found only in Europe. Rooks are slightly smaller than crows. Their all-black plumage has a purplish tinge. Adult birds shed the feathers around the face, leaving the skin bare near the bill. Rooks nest in large communities known as rookeries, a term that is also applied to communal nesting sites of other large birds. In winter some rooks migrate south. They feed primarily on insects and grain.

Jackdaws are black with gray around the throat. Their food habits are like those of rooks, with which they often live. Jackdaws find almost any nook or cranny a suitable nesting site.
