Taxonomically, pigeons and doves are the same. Both are members of the order Columbiformes, family Columbidae. The term dove is generally used for smaller species with pointed tails. “Pigeon” refers to the larger species with square or rounded tails.

Pigeons and doves are found throughout the world except in the polar regions and the most remote islands. Various species have adapted to life on farmlands, in woodlands, in scrub deserts, at high altitudes, and in cities. In many regions they are considered game birds and are hunted for food. Selective breeding has produced a number of species with exotic characteristics. The barb pigeon, for example, has wattles resembling those of a chicken, and the trumpeter and swallow pigeons have feathers on their feet. Such species are bred for exhibition. Others, such as tumbler pigeons, are used in aerial performances. Common species are often used in scientific research because of their abundance and availability. Wild pigeons are susceptible to parasites, particularly lice. Trichomoniasis is a disease caused by a parasite that lives in the bird’s liver, throat, and lungs. Serious outbreaks have killed thousands of mourning doves.
Characteristics and Life Cycle

The Columbidae range in size from the 6-inch (15-centimeter) North American common ground dove to the 33-inch (84-centimeter) crowned pigeon of New Guinea. They have plump bodies with short necks and small heads. Their legs are relatively short and the feet have four toes. The birds walk with small, deliberate steps and bob their heads distinctively.

The Columbidae have a well-developed crop that allows them to collect food faster than they can digest it. The food is stored in the crop for digestion at a later time. The birds feed on grain, seeds, wild berries, and small insects. Their manner of drinking is unusual. Nearly every other bird drinks by dipping its bill into water, collecting the liquid, and tipping its head back to allow the water to flow down its throat. A pigeon or dove, however, dips its bill into the water and sucks the fluid as if using a straw.

Pigeons and doves may be drab or brightly colored. They often have some iridescent feathers, and some birds have barred feather patterns. All have dense plumage, but the feathers are set loosely in the skin and fall out easily. Males and females are usually similar in appearance, though the females may be duller in color.

During courtship the male attempts to attract a female by strutting about with his feathers raised or spread. He may also use coos, hisses, whistles, and grunts to gain her attention, and some species have a loud wing-clapping display. The male may have already prepared a nest, or the pair may search for a site together. The female lays one or two white or cream-colored eggs.

Species that nest on the ground may use only a shallow depression hidden by surrounding vegetation. Arboreal species often build a flimsy nest of small, thin twigs on a horizontal branch or use an abandoned nest from another bird. Some species nest in shallow tree cavities or on cliff ledges. City pigeons often use window and building ledges for nest sites.

Both sexes incubate the eggs, which may take as little as twelve days to hatch. The newly hatched young are blind, nearly featherless, and helpless. Baby pigeons, called squabs, are fed a special fatty liquid called pigeon’s milk, the sloughed-off lining of the crop produced by both parents. The nestling obtains this milk by poking its bill down the parent’s throat. The adults care for their young until the small birds are ready to leave the nest. Individual birds of some species may live as long as 30 years.
Types

The family Columbidae may be divided into four subfamilies: Columbinae, Treroninae, Gourinae, and Didunculinae. The members of these subfamilies may differ in habit, appearance, or other characteristics.
True pigeons.

Members of the subfamily Columbinae are considered typical, or true, pigeons. The approximately 175 species in this subfamily are organized into 29 genera. They are found worldwide. Nearly all are seed eaters, but some also eat leaves. Most species are either predominantly white or drab colored, though, as its name implies, the green-winged pigeon is an exception.

The medium-size birds of the genus Columba are classified in this subfamily. They are strong fliers and include the birds popularly known as homing pigeons. Homing pigeons were selectively bred and originated in Belgium and England in the 19th century. These birds are trained to return to their home loft regardless of how far it is from the spot where they are released. Some homing pigeons can cover 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) in two days. Before modern communication methods were developed, homing pigeons were used to deliver important messages, especially in wartime. Today they are often bred for competitive racing. Homing pigeons are a variety of rock dove (Columba livia), a domesticated Eurasian species that has been introduced worldwide and is the base stock for many ornamental species. It is commonly referred to as a domestic, or street, pigeon. Other species introduced into the United States include the ringed turtle dove and the spotted dove.

The mourning dove (Zenaida macroura) lives in urban areas, woodlands, and in mountainous regions at altitudes up to 13,000 feet (3,960 meters). It is classified as a game bird in 31 states and is the only North American game bird that nests in all 48 states of the continental United States.

In the 19th century people wrote of seeing migratory flocks of pigeons that contained millions of birds and took four or more hours to pass overhead. These great flocks contained the doomed passenger pigeons (Ectopistes migratorius). This attractive bird, with a 9-inch (23-centimeter) tail, slate-blue head, and red eyes, ranged over eastern North America from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico. Its woodland habitat was cleared for farmland, and the birds were hunted to extinction by professional hunters who shipped the bodies by railway carloads to city markets.
Fruit pigeons.

The subfamily Treroninae contains the fruit pigeons, fruit-eating arboreal birds that are soft-billed and usually green with bright yellow, red, or other colored markings. They are native to Africa, southern Asia, Australia, and various Pacific islands. There are about 115 species organized into ten genera.

Members of the genus Ducula are the largest of the fruit pigeons. They are often called the imperial pigeons because of their size and heavy build. By spreading their large beaks they can eat entire fruits but do not digest the pit, or stone; it is eliminated intact. Some are dull-colored, and others are gray and pink with iridescent green highlights.

The medium-sized pigeons in the genus Treron are predominantly green but have colored markings and usually crimson legs. They commonly whistle rather than coo. They have a muscular gizzard and can digest the seeds and stones of the fruits they eat.
Crowned pigeons.

The subfamily Gourinae contains one genus, Goura, with three species. All are found only on the island of New Guinea. Crowned pigeons are ground-dwelling, turkey-sized birds with large, lacy, fan-shaped crests.
Tooth-billed pigeon.

The only member of the subfamily Didunculinae is the unusual tooth-billed pigeon (Didunculus strigirostris), found only on the Samoa Islands. It is an average-sized, ground-feeding pigeon with a stout, curved bill. In captivity it has been observed to hold its food down with its feet (unlike most pigeons) while pecking off pieces with its bill. Although it is originally a terrestrial bird, it has adopted arboreal ways in response to near extermination by predators that have been introduced on the islands. (See also Birds.)
