 Ducks are relatively small, short-necked, large-billed waterfowl (called wildfowl in Europe). Ducks belong to the family Anatidae (order Anseriformes), which also includes the swans and geese, but are then broken down into several subfamilies. In true ducks—those classified in the subfamily Anatinae—the legs are set far back on the body, as in swans, rather than forward, as in geese. This provides ducks with an advantage in swimming; however, the positioning of the legs makes a duck waddle when walking on land.

Ducks are found throughout the world from the Arctic regions to South America, Africa, and Australia. Some species of ducks occur in large numbers, while others are very rare. Because of their long migrations south during the winter, some species range over large portions of the northern continents.

The male duck, called the drake, has showy plumage during the breeding season and a more muted appearance the rest of the year. In addition to the yearly molt of flight feathers, male ducks undergo a second annual molt in which they change coloration. The female duck, called a hen, has a somewhat dull, inconspicuous coloration year-round. A brightly colored wing patch, called the speculum, is present in both sexes of some species, such as the mallard.

All true ducks, except those in the shelduck group and sea ducks, mature in the first year and pair only for the season—unlike the late-maturing, life-mating true geese and swans. Females lay large clutches of smooth-shelled rather than rough-shelled eggs.

Ducks are generally divided into three major groups, dabbling (or surface feeding), diving, and perching ducks, based on their characteristic behaviors. The dabbling ducks live in the shallows of lakes, ponds, marshes, and slow-moving streams. They dive very little. Instead, they feed by “tipping up” with the head down and feet and tail in the air and probe the mud bottoms for shellfish and insect larvae. Some swim around in the water eating surface plants and aquatic insects.

Mallards are among the most common of the dabbling ducks. They are found throughout the Northern Hemisphere. The drake has a glossy green head and a white ring around the neck. The back is gray-brown with a rich chestnut breast and grayish white underparts. The female mallard is a mottled brown.

The blue-winged, green-winged, and cinnamon teals, all belonging to the genus Anas, are the smallest of the dabbling ducks and are popular as game birds. Another duck popular among hunters is the common, or northern, pintail (A. acuta). It is widely distributed throughout the Northern Hemisphere. Other dabblers include the black duck and gadwall, as well as the shovelers and wigeons.
wood duck
Adrian Pingstone
Adrian Pingstone

The perching ducks typically inhabit wet woodlands, nest in holes in trees, and perch on branches by means of their long-clawed toes. Among the most colorful ducks in this category are the male of the wood duck (Aix sponsa), a perching duck of North America, and of its close relative, the mandarin duck (A. galericulata) of Asia.

Diving ducks live on open seas, lakes, lagoons, and estuaries. They dive in deep waters for their food of fishes, shellfish, and water plants. Common marine species include eiders and scoters. Eiders are beautifully patterned ducks native to northern Europe and North America. They are especially valued for their down. Commercial eiderdown is taken from the nest, which the female lines with down, and used as warm filling for jackets, pillows, quilts, and sleeping bags. Scoters are good swimmers and divers and are mainly marine except during the breeding season. The males are generally shiny black in color.

Primarily freshwater diving duck species include mergansers, ring-necked ducks, and pochards, including scaups and the canvasback. The mergansers (genus Mergus), except for one species, all live in northern regions. Mergansers are also called trash ducks because their flesh is rank. The ring-necked duck (Aythya collaris) is a popular game bird that is considered excellent table fare. The drake has a purplish black, iridescent head, a black back, and gray sides with a vertical wedge-shaped white patch in front of the wing. The hen is brown with a white eye ring. The various species of pochards are round-bodied, big-headed, rather silent birds of deep water; they dive well, with closed wings, to feed chiefly on aquatic plants.

The redhead, goldeneye, and bufflehead are diving ducks that live in fresh and saltwater, depending on the season. Members of the stifftail group, typified by the blue-billed ruddy duck (Oxyura jamaicensis), are highly aquatic diving ducks characterized by legs set far toward the rear of the body. The whistling ducks (genus Dendrocygna), also called tree ducks, are not true ducks but are more closely related to the geese and swans. The freckled duck and torrent duck, as well as the shelduck and steamer duck, are other unusual species.
