 Since ancient times the eagle has been used as a symbol of strength and courage. This large bird of prey has been admired for its powerful appearance and majestic, soaring flight. The Sumerians chose it as their emblem of power 5,000 years ago. So did imperial Rome many centuries later. Today the bald eagle is the national bird of the United States.

Eagles are raptors of the family Accipitridae, which also includes the hawks, falcons, and Old World vultures. They have heavy, hooked beaks; strong feet; and large, curved claws. Females are normally larger than males. Eagles mate for life. Birds of most eagle species use the same remote stick nests year after year and lay a clutch of from one to three eggs.

There are more than 50 species of eagles, found nearly all over the world. Only two species are native to North America—the bald and the golden. The bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) is dark brown with white feathers on its head, neck, and tail. Early colonists, used to the gray sea eagle of Europe, called these birds “bald-headed” (with bald meaning “white.”) Also a sea eagle, the bald eagle fishes in rivers, lakes, and other large bodies of water. It migrates only if the water that it normally fishes freezes. The females can reach about 43 inches (108 centimeters) in length, with a wingspan of 8 feet (2.5 meters).

The golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) is found throughout the Northern Hemisphere. It is somewhat larger than the bald eagle, and its plumage is darker except for tawny feathers on its head and neck that shimmer like gold. The golden eagle is one of about 30 species of so-called booted eagles, with legs feathered to the toes. The bald eagle and others have bare “ankles.”

The white-tailed eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla) is a sea eagle native to Europe. Forest eagles include the enormous harpy eagles that live in jungles in Central and South America and the South Pacific. Serpent eagles, which eat mainly snakes and other reptiles, are found in parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe. The bateleur (Terathopius ecaudatus), a small serpent eagle of Africa, is known for its aerial acrobatics.
