The falcon is a bird of prey, meaning that it pursues other animals for food. It is active during the day and is characterized by long, pointed wings and swift, powerful flight. Some 60 species belong to the Falconidae family, which includes such birds as the caracaras, falconets, forest falcons, and the merlin. The birds known as the true falcons (genus Falco) comprise only 35 species. The term hawk is sometimes used to identify some members of the family Falconidae.

Falcons occur virtually worldwide. They range in size from about 6 inches (15 centimeters) long in the falconets (Microhierax) to about 24 inches (60 centimeters) in the gyrfalcon (F. rusticolus), an Arctic species. In true falcons the female is the larger and bolder of the sexes. Falcons have plumes called “flags” on their legs and a notch in the beak that is well developed in the genus Falco to form a “tooth.”

Falcons are among the most agile hunters of the birds of prey. Unlike hawks and eagles, falcons rarely soar and glide. The flight of falcons is fast and direct with the wings rapidly digging through the air. Some falcons habitually hover while scanning the ground for prey. Some species capture birds of their own size or smaller in midair. Others live mainly on hares, mice, lizards, and insects, while some eat carrion (dead flesh) or plant matter. Because of these birds’ hunting prowess, the sport of falconry—the training of falcons to hunt—was a favorite pastime of the nobility of the Middle Ages, and in some parts of the world the sport is still popular.

Falcons commonly nest in holes in trees or on natural ledges on cliffs. The eggs are usually four or five in number and buffy white in color, speckled and blotched with reddish brown. The incubation period is about 28 or 35 days, and the young are cared for in the nest for as long as 35 days.

The medium-sized peregrine falcon (F. peregrinus) is the most widely distributed species of birds of prey, with breeding populations on every continent and many oceanic islands. Peregrines attain tremendous speeds (up to 200 miles [320 kilometers] per hour) and strike with clenched talons to kill on impact. A rival of the peregrine is the lower-flying gyrfalcon. The majestic gyrfalcon varies from pure white with black speckling to dark gray with barring, and the legs are fully feathered. Both of these birds were widely used in falconry.

As for other species of falcons, the bat falcon (F. albigularis) of Mexico and Central and South America is a little bird with a dark back, white throat, barred black-and-white breast, and reddish belly. The bat falcon preys upon birds. The forest falcon (Micrastur semitorquatus) of tropical America hunts birds and reptiles in the jungle. The laughing falcon (Herpetotheres cachinnans) of the wooded lowlands of Central and South America is a noisy brown bird that eats snakes. The prairie falcon (F. mexicanus), a desert falcon, inhabits canyon and scrub country in western North America.

The falconets (Microhierax species) and pygmy falcons (Polihierax) are tiny birds of the Old World tropics. They eat insects and birds. The caracaras, or carrion hawks, are medium-sized New World birds with distinctive long legs and patches of bare, reddish skin on or near the face. Caracaras are gregarious and aggressive. The merlin (F. columbarius), an aggressive, fearless hunter, is a small bird found at high latitudes throughout the Northern Hemisphere.
