mall, stout birds with conical bills adapted to crushing seed make up the finch group. They are closely related to the grosbeaks, sparrows, and buntings. All of them are members of the family Fringillidae, the largest of all the bird families. Its members are found in most of the world. (See also birds; cardinal; goldfinch; grosbeak; sparrow.)

The ground dwellers, such as the sparrows, are streaked brown. Of the tree dwellers, the males are richly colored. Female and young male tree-dwelling finches are usually less colorful. Farmers appreciate finches because they destroy weed seed. Because of their preference for seed, finches can find winter food more easily than the insect eaters can; therefore, the finches do not make long migrations. They are the chief winter residents in the North.

The house finch is a familiar and well-loved western bird. The male has brownish-gray upperparts, washed with red, and a rosy forehead and rump. The female lacks any red coloring.

The male purple finch is not purple but a rich shade of raspberry red. The female has a pronounced light stripe behind the eye. This finch nests in lawn trees and forests from northern Canada to the northern United States. It winters south to the Gulf coast.

The tips of the crossbill’s bill overlap each other. With one stroke of the beak, the bird can open the husk of a pine seed. The male of the species is colored dull brick red. The female is yellowish gray.

The northern junco of eastern North America nests in Northern forests. There are several species in the West. Among them is the Oregon junco, the male of which has a black hood, white underparts, and chestnut coloring over most of the rest of its body. The female is duller in color.

The rufous-sided towhee is a summer resident of the central and northern United States. It feeds while on the ground, scratching with its feet to stir up seeds and insects. The brown, green-tailed, and Abert’s towhees are residents of the Western states.

The redpoll is a small, gray-brown bird with a bright red cap and a rump tinged with pink. Its usual year-round habitat is the Canadian arctic, but during prolonged periods of extreme cold it sometimes migrates to the United States. The snow bunting inhabits the rocky cliffs of the Arctic during the summer months.

The scientific name of the purple finch is Carpodacus purpureus; the house finch, C. mexicanus; the rufous-sided towhee, Pipilo erythrophthalmus; the green-tailed towhee, P. chlorurus; the Abert’s towhee, P. aberti; and the common redpoll, Carduelis flammea.
