finch, any of several hundred species of small conical-billed, seed-eating songbirds (order Passeriformes). Well-known or interesting birds classified as finches include the bunting, canary, cardinal, chaffinch, crossbill, Galapagos finch, goldfinch, grass finch, grosbeak, sparrow, and weaver.

Finches are small, compactly built birds ranging in length from 10 to 27 cm (3 to 10 inches). Most finches use their heavy conical bills to crack the seeds of grasses and weeds. Many species supplement their diet with insects as well. The nestlings are unable to crack seeds and so are usually fed insects. Many finches are brightly coloured, often with various shades of red and yellow, as in crossbills, goldfinches, and cardinals. Others, especially those that live in grass or low bushes, are demurely clad and protectively coloured, although even these may be attractively spotted and streaked.

Finches are conspicuous songbirds throughout the temperate areas of the Northern Hemisphere and South America and in parts of Africa. Indeed, they are among the dominant birds in many areas, in numbers of both individuals and species. Several inconspicuous species of sparrows, such as the house sparrow (Passer domesticus), are particularly widespread. The seed-eating habits of many finches allow them to winter in cold areas, so they make up an even larger segment of the birdlife in that season.

Finches are generally excellent singers. However, their songs can range from the complex and beautiful repertoires of the song sparrow (Melospiza melodia) to the monotonously unmusical notes of the grasshopper sparrow (Ammodramus savannarum). Many kinds of finches are kept as cage birds.

The nesting habits of finches are not unusual. The females of most species build a cup-shaped nest of twigs, grasses, and roots on the ground or in bushes and lay four or five eggs. Sometimes the female incubates them alone, but usually the male assists in raising the young. Two or three broods may be raised in a season. Finches generally nest in scattered pairs, but they are highly gregarious at other times and are often seen in large flocks.

Formerly, finches were classified in the families Fringillidae, Emberizidae, Estrildidae, and Carduelidae, although authorities disagreed as to which finchlike birds should be classified in each family. Today, most taxonomists and birders classify finches as members of the family Fringillidae.
