Geese are large, heavy-bodied waterfowl (called wildfowl in Europe) that are midway in size and build between large ducks and the swans, both of which are relatives of geese. Geese belong to the family Anatidae (order Anseriformes). Many are members of the genera Anser (so-called gray geese) and Branta (so-called black geese). Associated mainly with freshwater and living in the Northern Hemisphere, these genera include the Canada goose, white-fronted goose, barnacle goose, and snow goose, as well as the brant and nene.

Male geese (ganders) are similar in appearance to females (hens), although the ganders are usually larger. The neck is always shorter than the body. The bill is humped at the base and tapered toward the tip. The legs are farther forward than in swans and ducks, allowing the bird to walk easily. Both sexes utter loud honking or gabbling cries when danger appears. When angry, geese vibrate their neck feathers; after driving away an intruder, the gander utters a triumphant note that is echoed by his mate and young goslings.

Geese pair for life and associate in flocks called gaggles. Simple nests are built on the ground, and the female typically lays 4 to 10 eggs. These rough-surfaced, whitish eggs are incubated for about a month by the hen while the gander stands guard. The downy young fend for themselves almost at once but remain with their parents during the first summer. Geese may survive for 10–15 years in the wild and more than 30 years in captivity.

These migratory birds winter in regions far south of their breeding grounds, although Canada geese (Branta canadensis) have become year-round residents of some areas. In migration they are greeted everywhere as a sign of the changing seasons. Powerful and high fliers, they travel in V-formations to conserve energy by taking advantage of air currents created by the wing tips.

The various subspecies of Canada geese are the best-known wild geese in North America. They nest from the northern United States to the Arctic tundra and winter as far south as Mexico. They were also introduced into England and parts of northern Europe in the 17th century. These birds are gray-brown above and have a black head and neck. A prominent white patch runs under the chin and up both cheeks. Canada geese range in size from 4.4 pounds (2 kilograms) in the cackling goose (B. canadensis minima) to about 14.3 pounds (6.5 kilograms) in mature males of the giant Canada goose (B. canadensis maxima). The latter has a wingspread of up to 6.6 feet (2 meters).

Among other North American species are the snow geese, which are white or dark birds with black wing tips. The blue goose is a bluish gray variety of snow goose with a white head. These geese spend the winter along the coasts of the United States. The brant is a small goose that resembles the Canada goose, with a black head, neck, and breast. Brants nest in Arctic regions and spend the winter in saltwater habitats of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts.
