Gulls are sturdily built, web-footed, sociable seabirds that are widely distributed throughout the world. Although most gulls stay relatively close to land, they are capable of floating on bodies of water to feed or rest. More than 40 species of these birds exist, and they belong to the gull and tern family Laridae (order Charadriiformes). Scientists place most of the gulls in the genus Larus.

Gulls generally vary in body length from about 11 to 31 inches (28 to 79 centimeters). The largest gull, the great black-backed gull (L. marinus), has a wingspread of 63 inches (1.6 meters). It occurs on the coasts of the North Atlantic. With a wingspread of about 24 inches (60 centimeters), the smallest gull is the little gull (L. minutus), a black-headed species of Europe and occasionally North America.

Adult gulls are mainly gray or white, with variable head markings. In breeding season the head is either pure white, black, gray, or brown; it becomes streaked or smudgy in winter. The bill is strong and slightly hooked and in some species shows a spot of color. Bill and leg colors help to distinguish species, as do wing patterns.

Gulls are scavengers and will feed on insects, mollusks, and crustaceans on beaches; worms and grubs in plowed fields; fish along shores; and garbage from ships. Some of the larger gulls prey on the eggs and the young of other birds, including their own kind. Gulls are mostly ground nesters, and those that breed inland usually go to coasts in winter.

The herring gull (L. argentatus) is by far the most familiar of the Atlantic gulls. A bird of the Northern Hemisphere, it has a gray mantle, flesh-colored legs and feet, and black-and-white-spotted wing tips. The bird became rare at the turn of the century, as its feathers were used as decorations in women’s hats. Legal protection and open garbage dumps helped it stage a spectacular comeback.

Herring gulls are scavengers as well as expert thieves, boldly stealing food from other birds and sometimes snatching sandwiches out of beachgoers’ hands. They also hunt moles and even rabbits, hovering over their holes waiting for the quarry to appear. Often they eat mollusks, whose hard shells they crack by flying over a hard surface and dropping them in flight.

Among some of the other notable gulls is the black-headed gull (L. ridibundus). This dark-headed bird with crimson legs breeds in Eurasia and Iceland, winters south in India and the Philippines, and commonly feeds in fields, where its chief food is insects. The California gull (L. californicus) of North America breeds inland and winters on the Pacific coast. This species is credited with having saved the crops of early Mormon settlers in the Salt Lake City region from destruction by the Mormon cricket, a long-horned grasshopper; it is the state bird of Utah. The laughing gull (L. atricilla), a medium-sized bird with a black head, red bill, and red feet, often gives vent to a strident, laughing call. It breeds from Maine in North America to northern South America and winters south in Brazil, often on fresh waters far inland.
