
Hawks are any of various small to medium-sized birds of prey, or birds that pursue other animals for food. Hawks belong to the scientific family Accipitridae of the order Falconiformes; the genus Accipiter contains the birds known as the true hawks, which includes the goshawks and sparrowhawks. The term hawk, however, can be confusing, as it is often applied to other birds in the family Accipitridae (such as the kites, buzzards, and harriers) and is sometimes extended to include certain members of the family Falconidae (falcons and caracaras).

Hawks occur on all the continents except Antarctica. They can usually be found in forests. They range in size from about 12 inches (30 centimeters) long to about 20 inches (51 centimeters) long. Most hawks have a long tail and short, rounded wings, which allow them to fly fast and low in areas with bushes and trees. Hawks, like other birds of prey, have sharp claws and a strong beak to catch and kill prey.

The great majority of hawks are more useful to humans than they are harmful, but there is still widespread prejudice against them. Occasionally they destroy poultry and smaller birds, but usually they eat small mammals, reptiles, and insects. Hawks have many foraging techniques, but the most typical in their pursuit of prey is raking, or swiftly following the animal’s efforts to escape. Once the hawk has secured the prey with its powerful talons, the bird dismembers it with its sharply pointed, strong beak.

Most species of hawk nest in trees, but some, such as the marsh hawk (Circus cyaneus), nest on the ground in grassy places, and others nest on cliffs. Hawks lay from three to six brown-spotted eggs that are incubated for four to five weeks by the female. The young fledge after five or six weeks.

The so-called true hawks of the genus Accipiter include the sharp-shinned hawk (A. striatus), which is found throughout the New World. These birds are about 12 inches (30 centimeters) long and are gray above with fine rusty barring below. Cooper’s hawk (A. cooperii) is a North American species similar in appearance to the sharp-shinned hawk but larger, growing up to 20 inches (50 centimeters) long. A long tail and short, rounded wings give these fast, low-flying birds great maneuverability. They feed on birds and small mammals; of all the New World raptors, Cooper’s hawk is most suspect when poultry yards are raided.

The goshawk and the sparrowhawk are also members of this group. The northern goshawk (A. gentilis) is one of the largest hawks at about 2 feet (60 centimeters) in length with a 4.3-foot (1.3-meter) wingspread. It lives in the Northern Hemisphere and is gray with dark gray bands on its undersides. The goshawk is a typical hawk in that it lives in wooded areas, builds a platform nest usually in a tree, and feeds mainly on birds and small mammals. Many sparrowhawks share these same characteristics.

Harriers, slender birds with long legs and tails, inhabit grasslands and marshes. The best-known harrier is the marsh hawk, which is also called the hen, or northern, harrier. It is found mostly in the Northern Hemisphere. All harriers have a disc of facial feathers, which gives them an owlish appearance. As in an owl, this disc directs sound to the bird’s ears to help it locate prey. Harriers hunt by flying slowly and low to the ground and then dropping rapidly on small animals. Usually harriers choose nests close to the ground, which is unusual for any bird of prey, as most prefer nests that are high and inaccessible.

The buteos, also called buzzard hawks, are broad-winged, wide-tailed, soaring raptors found in the New World, Eurasia, and Africa. The red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), the most common North American species, is about 24 inches (60 centimeters) long, varying in color but generally brownish above and somewhat lighter below with a rust-colored tail. This beneficial hunter preys mainly on rodents, but it also catches other small mammals as well as various birds, reptiles (including rattlesnakes and copperheads), amphibians, and even insects. The red-shouldered hawk (B. lineatus), common in eastern and Pacific North America, is a reddish brown bird about 20 inches (50 centimeters) long, with closely barred underparts.

The black hawks are two species of short-tailed and exceptionally wide-winged black buteos. The great black hawk, or Brazilian eagle (Buteogallus urubitinga), is about 24 inches (60 centimeters) long. It ranges from Mexico to Argentina. The smaller common, or Mexican, black hawk (B. anthracinus) has some white markings and ranges from northern South America into the southwestern United States. Both species feed on frogs, fish, and other aquatic creatures.

