The ibis is a medium-sized wading bird with a long, slender, downward-curving bill. These birds have long legs and necks, but their tails are short. Like the cranes, ibis fly with neck and legs extended, alternately flapping and sailing. There are about 26 species of ibis, which constitute the subfamily Threskiornithinae of the family Threskiornithidae (order Ciconiiformes), which also includes the spoonbills.

Ibis occur in all warm regions except on South Pacific islands. They wade in shallow lagoons, lakes, bays, and marshes and use their bills to feed on small fishes and soft mollusks. Ibis range in length from about 22 to 30 inches (55 to 75 centimeters). The birds usually breed in vast colonies, building compact stick nests low in bushes or trees. They lay three to five eggs that are usually dull white or mottled with brown.

The most abundant ibis in the United States is the white ibis (Eudocimus albus). The adult’s plumage is pure white, with glossy black wing tips. The face, bill, and legs are red. Immature birds are a dull grayish brown with a white head and neck and white underparts. The males and females look alike.

The glossy ibis (Plegadis falcinellus) and the closely related white-faced ibis (P. chihi) are small birds with dark reddish brown and glossy purplish plumage. They are often found together throughout the warmer regions of the world. The scarlet ibis (Eudocimus ruber) inhabits tropical South America. The sacred ibis (Threskiornis aethiopica), of southern Arabia and Africa south of the Sahara and formerly of Egypt, was revered by the ancient Egyptians. It is about 30 inches (75 centimeters) long, white with black in its wings, and has dark plumes on the lower back and a bare black head and neck. The hadada (Hagedashia hagedash) is a gray-brown African ibis with a loud call. The straw-necked ibis (T. spinicollis) is unknown outside Australia. It is less aquatic than the other species. Its principal food is grasshoppers.

Other species of ibis have become endangered. The hermit ibis (Geronticus eremita) inhabits northern Africa and the Middle East. Its bill and the bare skin on its head are reddish. Breeding colonies once existed in central and southern Europe, Syria, and Algeria but are now known only in Turkey and Morocco. The Japanese, or crested, ibis (Nipponia nippon) is white with a red face. It has been on the verge of extinction since the late 20th century.

The North American ibis are sometimes called curlews. The true curlews, however, although their bills are similar, are short-legged waders. The so-called wood ibis is a stork.

