ibis, any of about 26 species of medium-sized wading birds constituting the subfamily Threskiornithinae of the family Threskiornithidae (order Ciconiiformes), which also includes the spoonbills. Ibises range in length from about 55 to 75 cm (22 to 30 inches). They occur in all warm regions except on South Pacific islands. They wade in shallow lagoons, lakes, bays, and marshes and use their slender, down-curved bills to feed on small fishes and soft mollusks. They fly with neck and legs extended, alternately flapping and sailing. Ibises usually breed in vast colonies, building compact stick nests low in bushes or trees and laying three to five eggs, usually dull white or mottled with brown.

The glossy ibis (Plegadis falcinellus) and its close relative the white-faced ibis (P. chihi) are small forms with dark reddish brown and glossy purplish plumage. As a group they are found throughout the warmer regions of the world.

The hadada ibis, or hadada (Hagedashia hagedash), of Africa, is a greenish ibis known for its loud call.

The straw-necked ibis (Threskiornis spinicollis) is unknown outside Australia. It is less aquatic than the other species. Its principal food is grasshoppers.

The hermit ibis (Geronticus eremita), an endangered species, inhabits northern Africa and the Middle East. Its bill and the bare skin on its head are reddish. Breeding colonies once existed in central and southern Europe, Syria, and Algeria but are now known only in Turkey and Morocco.

The Japanese, or crested, ibis (Nipponia nippon) is white with a red face. An endangered species, it was considered to be on the verge of extinction in the late 20th century.

The sacred ibis (Threskiornis aethiopica), of southern Arabia and Africa south of the Sahara and formerly of Egypt, was sacred to the ancient Egyptians. It is about 75 cm (30 inches) long, white with black in its wings, and has dark plumes on the lower back and a bare black head and neck.

For wood storks, sometimes called wood ibises, see stork.
