 “As crazy as a loon” is an expression that comes from the strange, laughterlike notes that the common loon sends ringing across the waters of North American inland lakes. This bird and three other species make up the family Gaviidae.

During the nesting season loons live near freshwater lakes and ponds. In winter they cruise the seas and large lakes, often living 50 miles (80 kilometers) or more from land. Because their webbed feet are set far back on the body, they are clumsy creatures on land, wobbling along with the assistance of their wings and bill. Although they have some difficulty in rising from the water, they are strong fliers. Fishes, frogs, and aquatic insects are their chief food. Their nests, with two brown eggs, are usually roughly fashioned near the water. The parents are remarkably affectionate, swimming about in company with their young or carrying them on their backs.

The common loon is about 32 inches (81 centimeters) in length. In summer its plumage is beautiful—black-spotted and barred with white, shading to pure white beneath. In winter the upper parts are blackish without white spots. It breeds from Labrador to Maine and west to northern Illinois and winters from the Great Lakes south.

The red-throated loon, a smaller species about 25 inches (64 centimeters) in length, visits the United States only during winter, when it frequents both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts. The plumage of the back, wings, and tail is a dusky brown, slightly spotted with white. Its name is derived from its chestnut-colored throat. The Pacific loon has black upper parts with a band of white streaks on the throat. It is found in the United States mainly in winter, when it ranges along the Pacific coast from Alaska to Lower California. The loon is the state bird of Minnesota.

Loons form the order Gaviiformes, or diving birds. The scientific name of the common loon is Gavia immer; of Pacific loon, G. pacifica; of red-throated loon, G. stellata. Some classifications use the generic name of the closely related grebes, Colymbus, for loons.
