The bird of prey known as the osprey is also called the fish hawk because its diet consists mostly of fish. Scientists do not consider the osprey to be a true hawk, however. Ospreys are generally larger than hawks but smaller than eagles. The scientific name of the osprey is Pandion haliaetus.

Ospreys may be found on all continents except Antarctica. They do not breed in South America, but some migrate there during the winter. Other ospreys that live in places where the weather gets cold also travel to warm places for the winter. Ospreys always live near bodies of water—rivers, seas, lakes, or swamps—where fish can be found swimming close to the surface.

Ospreys measure up to 26 inches (66 centimeters) long but weigh only about 3–4 pounds (1.4–1.8 kilograms). Their outstretched wings measure about 5 feet (1.5 meters) across from tip to tip. Females are generally larger than males. The feathers are blackish brown with white on the underside. The mostly white head has dark patches behind the eyes. The bill is black, and the lower legs are bluish gray. An osprey’s curved claws, or talons, are long and sharp. The toes have small hooks on the bottom that aid the bird in grasping slippery fish.

Ospreys are skilled hunters. A hungry osprey flies over water, using its keen eyesight to spot a fish. After hovering for a moment, the bird plunges feet first into the water to grab the fish. The bird may stay underwater for a second. Gripping the fish with its feet, the osprey then breaks the surface of the water and flies away to its nest or a perch, often a tree branch. Sometimes, however, an eagle or another large bird will force the osprey to give up its catch.

Osprey mating pairs often stay partners for life. The male and the female together build a nest of large sticks. Many ospreys make their nests at the tops of trees or on other tall structures, such as telephone poles. Others nest on the ledges of cliffs or even at ground level. A mating pair builds up the same nest year after year. Small songbirds will sometimes make their own nests on the sides of a large osprey nest.

A female osprey lays two to four eggs. The parents take turns sitting on the eggs until they hatch, about 38 days later. The female stays in the nest to protect the chicks while the male leaves to catch fish for the family. The young ospreys are ready to fly after about seven to eight weeks. They in turn begin to breed when they are about 3 years old. Ospreys live an average of 8 to 10 years, but some live longer than 20 years.

For many years the survival of ospreys has been threatened in some areas because of human activities. Hunting has been one danger. Some people who raised fish for sale killed ospreys because they thought that the birds were eating too many fish. Other people hunted ospreys just for sport. Today laws ban the hunting of ospreys in some places. Another major threat to ospreys has been pesticides, or poisons that are used to kill insects. In the mid–20th century a pesticide called DDT came into widespread use in the United States. DDT polluted waterways and poisoned the fish that ospreys ate. The poison did not kill the ospreys, but it weakened the shells of their eggs so that they broke before the chicks were ready to hatch. After the United States banned DDT in 1972, the osprey population began to recover. A continuing threat to ospreys, however, is the destruction of natural areas where the birds live.
