The osprey is a large, long-winged hawk that is considered to be a bird of prey since it pursues other animals for food. Also known as a fish hawk, the osprey is particularly noted for its method of seizing its favorite prey—fish—by plunging feet first into the water. The osprey is the only species in the family Pandionidae, and its scientific name is Pandion haliaetus.

Ospreys live in most temperate and tropical regions of the world and are found on all continents except Antarctica. They live near rivers, swamps, or other bodies of water. These birds are about 26 inches (65 centimeters) long but weigh only about 3–4 pounds (1.4–1.8 kilograms). Their outstretched wings measure about 5 feet (1.5 meters) across from tip to tip. Females are generally larger than males.


Ospreys are brown above and white below, with some white on the head and a black bill. The lower legs are bluish gray. As is typical of most raptors, ospreys have strong feet and sharp talons. The toes have small hooks on the bottom that aid the bird in grasping slippery fish. Ospreys fly over the water to hunt and then carry the prey to a favorite perch to feed. Sometimes after feeding ospreys will fly low over the water, dragging their feet as if to wash them.


Ospreys build haphazardly arranged stick nests in tall trees, on the ground on small islands, or on ledges of cliffs. The nest is a bulky structure, up to 6.6 feet (2 meters) across. The same nests may be used by many generations of birds, becoming huge in the process. Two to four white eggs with dark brown blotches are laid. Downy young hatch in about five weeks and are fed by both parents. The young birds are ready to fly in six to eight weeks.

The North American population of ospreys declined greatly after 1947 because of the eggshell-thinning effects of DDT residues; however, the birds began to recover after the pesticide was banned in 1972. Exterminated from the British Isles by 1910, the osprey reappeared there as a successfully breeding species in the 1950s and is now firmly reestablished in Scotland.
