The largest living bird in the world is the flightless ostrich found only in open country of Africa. The ostrich’s egg, averaging about 6 inches (150 millimeters) in length by 5 inches (125 millimeters) in diameter and weighing about 3 pounds (1.35 kilograms), is also the world’s largest. Ostriches are the only members of the family Struthionidae in the order Struthioniformes—a group that also contains kiwis, emus, cassowaries, and rheas. The ostrich’s scientific name is Struthio camelus. (See also flightless bird.)

An adult male ostrich can grow to about 9 feet (2.75 meters) tall, although almost half of its height is neck. It can also weigh more than 330 pounds (150 kilograms). The female is somewhat smaller. The male is mostly black but has white plumes in the wings and tail; females are mostly brown. The head and most of the neck are lightly feathered; the legs, including the powerful thighs, are bare. The head is small, the bill short and rather wide; the big brown eyes have thick black lashes.

Ostriches can be found individually, in pairs, in small flocks, or in large groups, depending on the season. The ostrich relies on its strong legs to escape its enemies, which are chiefly humans and the larger carnivores. The ostrich is the only bird with two toes. The main toe is developed almost as a hoof and ends with a long claw. A frightened ostrich can reach speeds of 45 miles (72.5 kilometers) per hour. If cornered, the bird can deliver dangerous kicks.

Ostriches live mainly on plants but also may consume some insects and small animals such as lizards. Ostriches get most of their water from the vegetation that they eat, although they will drink from water holes if they come upon them.

Breeding males let out lionlike roars and hisses as they fight for a harem of three to five females, called hens. The eggs from each harem are laid in a communal nest scraped in the ground by the male. Each nest usually contains more than a dozen shiny, whitish eggs. The major hen of the harem may get rid of some of the eggs to make incubation more manageable. The male sits on the eggs by night; the females take turns during the day. The chicks hatch in about 40 days and when a month old can keep up with running adults. Ostriches do well in captivity and may live 50 years.

To escape detection, an ostrich may lie on the ground with its neck outstretched. This habit may have given rise to the mistaken belief that the ostrich buries its head in the sand when danger threatens.
