Owls are birds of prey, meaning that they pursue other animals for food. Owls are characterized by their large, fixed eyes and are known for the ability to turn their rounded head to look directly behind them. These night-flying raptors belong in the order Strigiformes, which is made up of two families of owls: the barn owls and the typical owls. Scientific study of owls is difficult owing to their silent nighttime activity, with the result that the ecology, behavior, and taxonomy of many species remain poorly understood.

Distribution and Habitat

Owls are found on all continents except Antarctica and on most oceanic islands. Some, such as the barn owl (Tyto alba) and the short-eared owl (Asio flammeus), are among the most widely distributed birds; others, such as the Palau owl (Pyrroglaux podargina) and the Seychelles owl (Otus insularis), are native island species with small populations. Owls utilize virtually all habitats, from grassland and tundra to dense woodland and rainforest.

Physical Characteristics

All owls share the same general body plan. The face is flat with a small hooked beak and large, forward-facing eyes. Remarkable flexibility of the neck compensates for the fixed position of the eyes; an owl can turn its head more than 180° in either direction and can thus look directly backward.

The size of owls ranges with lengths of about 5–28 inches (13–70 centimeters) and wingspans between 1–6.6 feet (0.3–2.0 meters). Most owl species are at the lower end of the size range, and most females are usually larger than the males. The wings are long and rounded, the tail short. The legs and toes are of medium length and exceptionally strong for the size of the bird. Each toe is provided with a needle-sharp, curved talon. Most owls use their feet only for perching and grasping prey. The burrowing owls, however, being terrestrial, can run rapidly over the ground and rarely perch in vegetation.

The plumage of owls is soft, dense, and loose. A thick layer of down provides northern owls with insulation against cold. In general, owls have very keen hearing and eyesight that is extremely sensitive to any movement in dim light. Some birds in the family of typical owls have tufts of feathers over their ears. The tufts serve to break the round outline of the head, adding to the concealment gained from color and pattern. All owls have soft feathers that allow for “silent” flight, which is an aid in hunting.

Owls vary in color from white through many shades of tan, gray, brown, or reddish to deep brown. A few are solidly colored, but most are patterned with streaks, bars, or spots, often resulting in the bird’s being almost invisible against tree bark. Size and color variations differ between northern and southern birds of the same species.

Feeding Habits and Social Behavior

In general, the type of prey taken is dictated by the size of the owl and by the relative abundance of potential prey. Owls that hunt over grassland, such as the barn owl and short-eared owl, hunt by sustained flight, dropping into the grass to catch rodents. Many woodland owls secure prey by dropping from perches at the edges of forest openings. The Southeast Asian hawk owl (Ninox scutulata) sallies from a perch to catch flying insects. The whiskered owl (Otus trichopsis) takes flying insects in foliage. Fish owls (Ketupa and Scotopelia) are adapted for grabbing live fish but also eat other animals.

Some owls have developed specialized forms of feeding behavior. The elf owl (Micrathene whitneyi), for instance, has been seen hovering before blossoms, where it scares insects into flight with its wings and then catches them with its beak. A bay owl (Phodilus badius) has been documented stationing itself within a cave to catch bats as they issued forth at dusk. Prey is generally swallowed whole, and indigestible material, such as feathers, fur, and bones, are regurgitated in the form of a compact pellet.
owl

Sound is important to owls, especially in mating and in defending territory. Usual owl sounds include snaps of the bill, claps of the wings in flight, and a variety of vocalizations, with pitches, timbres, and rhythms unique to each species. The owl’s so-called songs vary from deep hoots in some large species to chirps, whistles, or warblings in many small owls. When nestlings of the burrowing owl (Speotyto cunicularia) are threatened, the young emit a call that resembles the warning buzz of a rattlesnake—a frequent inhabitant of rodent burrows.
barn owl; dormouse1:25

The nocturnal routine of most owls involves peaks of activity at dusk and dawn. The owl leaves its secluded roost about dusk and moves to a perch overlooking the hunting area. There is a brief period of song, followed by about half an hour of foraging, then a longer period of song. Most of the darker hours of the night are spent inactively, with a period of alternating singing and hunting just before dawn.

Reproduction and Mating

Most owls nest in natural cavities in trees or cliffs or in woodpecker holes. The barn owls and the Eurasian little owls (Athene species) frequently use cavities in buildings. Some of the larger owls utilize old hawk or crow nests. Grassland and tundra owls nest on the ground, sometimes on an elevated hummock, and the burrowing owl digs a nest chamber in a rodent burrow. The great gray owl (Strix nebulosa) occasionally constructs its own platform nest in a tree. In desert areas the smaller owls rely primarily on holes made by woodpeckers in large cacti. Frequently the nest cavity provides a daytime roost for one or both of the pair during the nonbreeding months.

Owls lay more eggs than most diurnal raptors, with clutches of up to 12 in the snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca). The eggs of owls are more spherical than those of any other bird group. They are typically laid at two-day intervals, but hatching is not synchronized. The result is that the oldest and youngest nestlings of a large brood may be hatched two or three weeks apart. If the availability of food is inadequate for the adult owls to support the entire large brood, the younger nestlings starve.
