The tiniest pygmy parrot, largest macaw, and all the variously sized parakeets and cockatoos in between belong to the family Psittacidae of parrots and related birds. The family also includes the lories, lovebirds, keas, cockatiels, lorikeets, parrotlets, budgerigars, rosellas, conures, and amazons. The birds of this family range in length from 4 to 40 inches (10 to 100 centimeters).

They have relatively large heads set on short stocky bodies, and most have short, rounded tails. Their large, hooked bills are strong enough to chisel open the toughest of nuts and may be used like a third foot when climbing. The thick fleshy tongue helps in manipulating food. Their zygodactyl feet—with two toes pointing forward and two backward—give them greater dexterity than any other group of birds. They can climb trees, manipulate objects, and grasp their food as they eat it.

Parrots and their relatives inhabit most tropical and south temperate regions of the world. Most make their nests in the hollows of trees. Their usual diet consists of seeds and fruits, but many species also eat insects. The birds typically live for 30 to 50 years. The destruction of their native habitats and the illegal collection of certain members of the parrot family have left about 30 species threatened with extinction.

Parrots have excellent hearing and vision and some are renowned for their ability to mimic human speech and other sounds. The amazon parrots are perhaps the most familiar mimics, but the African gray parrot is unsurpassed as a talker. Both birds may develop extensive vocabularies, and at least some species may understand what they are saying.

The rare kakapo, or owl parrot, of New Zealand is a nocturnal bird and is the only parrot that is entirely flightless. The pygmy parrots of New Guinea are the smallest members of the parrot family, measuring only 3 inches (8 centimeters) long.

Parrots and certain other birds can transmit psittacosis, a potentially fatal viral disease that can infect humans. As a precaution, laws were enacted in the 1930s regulating the importation of these birds.

Among the most brilliantly colored of all birds, the macaws can be distinguished by their pointed wings and exceptionally long tails. The 40-inch (102-centimeter) hyacinth macaw is the largest bird in the parrot family. Its close relatives, the Lear’s and glaucous macaws, are rare and are hardly ever found in captivity. Most captive macaws are members of the genus Ara, which includes the military and noble macaws.
Cockatoos

Most cockatoos are white and all have a crest, but in some species it is erected only if the bird is excited. From a layer of down next to the cockatoo’s body a fine powder is shed that cleans and waterproofs the outer feathers. Sulfur-crested cockatoos are commonly kept as pets.

There are roughly 300 species of birds in the Psittacidae family. True parrots belong to the subfamily Psittacinae, as do the macaws; cockatoos belong to the subfamily Cacatuinea. (See also birds.)
