 “A wonderful bird is the pelican, His bill will hold more than his belican.” So begins a well-known limerick on the pelican’s comical appearance. The bird is large-bodied and short-legged and has a bill that is longer than its head with an enormous pouch of skin fastened to the lower mandible. The pouch does in fact hold more than the pelican’s stomach—about 3 gallons (11 liters) when full. Pelicans use the expandable pouch as a dip net: they scoop up fish through their wide-open mouths then hold the fish in the pouches long enough to squeeze out the water from the corners of their mouths. Then they swallow their catch. The pouch is not used to store fishes; they are carried in the gullet, or esophagus.

The solemn-looking pelicans are among the largest of living birds. Some reach lengths of 70 inches (180 centimeters) and may weigh up to 30 pounds (14 kilograms). They flock together in colonies to rear their young, and some species set out in groups on fishing trips. They are silent creatures, emitting no sound but an occasional grunt.

On land, pelicans are awkward birds, but in the air they perform graceful and magnificent group flights. In level flight they fly with their heads held back on their shoulders and their bills resting on their folded necks, propelling themselves with slow, powerful beats of their wings. On wings spread as wide as 9 feet (2.7 meters) they can soar impressively, and some species may dive from heights of 60 feet (18 meters) or more to make their catch. Pelicans are strong swimmers as well. Their bodies, which have numerous air sacs, are as buoyant as cork, and their large webbed feet make powerful paddles.

The female pelican lays one to four bluish white eggs in a stick nest, and the young emerge in about a month. They live on regurgitated food obtained by thrusting their bills down the parent’s gullet. They mature in three to four years.

There are six to eight species of pelicans inhabiting lakes, rivers, and seacoasts in the temperate and tropical regions of the world. Best known are the two species called white pelicans: the North American white pelican and the European white pelican. The gregarious North American white pelican breeds on islands in lakes in north-central and western North America. All pairs in any colony at any given time are in the same stage of the reproductive cycle. The North American white pelican is migratory, as are some other species.

The smaller brown pelican, 42 to 54 inches (107 to 137 centimeters) in length, is a New World coastal species listed as endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Its populations in the United States declined drastically as a result of widespread use of DDT and related pesticides. These pesticides interfere with the birds’ calcium metabolism, causing the females to lay eggs with weak shells that tend to break during incubation. The species’ breeding improved, however, when the use of DDT was banned. The brown pelican breeds along the tropical and subtropical shores of both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts. It is the official state bird of Louisiana.

Pelicans belong to the family Pelecanidae. The scientific name of the North American white pelican is Pelecanus erythrorhynchos; of the European white pelican, P. onocrotalus; and of the brown pelican, P. occidentalis.
