Introduction

Penguins are flightless seabirds that live only in the Southern Hemisphere (south of the Equator). There are 18 species of penguins. They form the family Spheniscidae of the order Sphenisciformes. Penguins are further subdivided into six genera. Of the more well-known penguins, the scientific name of the emperor penguin is Aptenodytes forsteri. The king penguin is A. patagonicus. The Adélie penguin is Pygoscelis adeliae.

Distribution and Habitat

Antarctica is home to emperor and Adélie penguins. Although all penguins live in the Southern Hemisphere, however, they do not all live in Antarctica. In fact, the majority of penguins live between latitudes 45° and 60° S. This region covers the bottom tips of South America, Africa, and Australia and all the ocean water south to just above Antarctica. The penguins breed on the islands in that area. A few penguins inhabit temperate regions. One, the Galapagos penguin (Spheniscus mendiculus), lives at the Equator.

Physical Characteristics

Penguins are stocky with short legs. Prehistoric penguins stood 6 feet (1.8 meters) tall. Today the largest penguin is the emperor penguin, which is about 45 inches (115 centimeters) tall and weighs about 55 to 90 pounds (25 to 40 kilograms). One of the smallest penguins is the blue, or fairy, penguin (Eudyptula minor). It is about 14 inches (35 centimeters) in height and about 2 pounds (1 kilogram) in weight.

Most penguins are black on the back and white below. They often have lines of black across the upper breast or spots of white on the head. Color is rare but, if present, is mostly on the head. For example, some species have red or yellow irises of the eye, red beaks or feet, or yellow brow tufts. The emperor and king penguins have orange and yellow on the head, neck, and breast.

Behavior

Penguin ancestors could fly as well as any other seabird. Now penguins’ wings are short, paddlelike flappers that are entirely useless for flight. Penguins have lived for ages in or near the Antarctic regions, where they have few human or animal enemies. Thus they came to spend all their time on land or in the water. For generations they did not fly. In the course of long evolution, their wings became small and stiff and lost the long feathers. Now their wings cannot be moved at the middle joint as can the wings of flying birds.

The penguins, however, became master swimmers and divers. Of all birds, they are the most fully adapted to water. Flocks of penguins may stay at sea for weeks at a time. They resemble schools of dolphins as they leap in graceful arcs from the water to take breaths of air.

Penguins have a thick coat of feathers that provides a smooth surface that is impenetrable to water. The streamlined bodies glide through the water easily. Penguins use the wings as swimmers use their arms in a crawl stroke, and the birds steer with the feet. Penguins can swim at speeds of more than 25 miles (40 kilometers) per hour. When they want to leave the water, they can leap as much as 6 feet (1.8 meters) from the water’s surface onto a rock or iceberg.

On land, penguins are much more awkward. They rock from side to side as they walk. Despite their short legs, however, penguins can run with surprising speed. Some, including Adélie penguins, move among rocks with agility. They use the flippers for balance. On snow or ice, many penguins slide on the belly as they propel themselves with the feet and flippers. The flippers, along with the beak, are the prime weapons in defense and attack.

A penguin’s skin is insulated by a layer of air trapped under the feathers. The only bare skin in direct contact with the water is that of the feet. Penguins also have thick coats of fat to protect them against cold. Adult penguins molt all their feathers once a year following the breeding period. While in molt the bird is unable to enter the water. Instead, it withdraws to a communal molting site usually in a sheltered area away from the colony. The duration of the molt varies from about two weeks in small species to more than a month in the larger ones.

Penguins feed underwater on fish, squid, and krill (tiny crustaceans). The principal enemies of penguins at sea are the leopard seal and the killer whale (orca). Seals also take penguins near Australia, New Zealand, and other areas near the Antarctic.

Life Cycle

The majority of penguin species breed only once each year. Most penguins begin breeding in the spring or summer. The birds use many types of visual and vocal displays between their arrival at the colony and their departure. Courtship calls are used during pairing and during other phases of breeding.
macaroni penguins

Upon arrival at the colony, each bird returns to the nest that it left the previous year. The nests are built on the ground from pebbles, mud and vegetation, or any materials that are available. Each penguin generally rejoins its mate of the previous year. If one of the pair has died, the remaining penguin chooses another partner. The female lays one or two chalky white eggs. The eggs are incubated in turns by both parents, one remaining on the nest while the other goes off to feed. Their unrelenting attention is often necessary because some predatory birds will wait in the middle of penguin colonies to snatch an unattended egg or chick.
emperor penguins with an egg

The breeding behavior of the emperor penguin is quite different. After laying her single egg, the female leaves to feed. The male incubates the egg by himself, cradling it between the top of his feet and his stomach. For two months the colonies of fasting males remain on the icy nesting grounds, warming and protecting their eggs. During violent winter storms, members of the colony gather for mutual protection from wind and cold in tightly packed crowds called huddles. By the time the eggs have hatched, the males have lost a third of their body weight. When the females return to care for the chicks, the males are at last free to return to the water for food and rest.

Emergence of a penguin chick from the shell takes 24 to 48 hours. The baby birds are born covered with down. During its early days the young bird is sheltered under the body of one of its parents. The parents feed it by regurgitation. After growing older, the chick joins 100 or more others in a nursery group called a crèche. The young are protected by a few adults while the rest of the parents forage at sea. Upon returning with food, the parent calls its chick from the crèche. The parent can find its offspring by voice and appearance. During the crèche stage the fuzzy down of the chick is replaced by a coat of short, stiff feathers. They are similar to those of the adult but usually somewhat different in color. Once this molt is complete, the juvenile leaves the colony to find its own food at sea. This whole process takes from 2 to 14 months, depending on the species.

Conservation

In the past, 19th-century whalers and seal hunters visited some penguin colonies for meat and eggs. In addition, a penguin oil industry once took large numbers of the birds. By the early 20th century, this exploitation was no longer profitable. Most penguin colonies were left alone or actively protected.

In the early 21st century, the total populations of many species of penguins were in the hundreds of thousands or millions. However, such problems as loss of habitat, food shortages, pollution, and disease have threatened some species. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed several penguin species on its Red List of threatened species. For example, the organization named the yellow-eyed penguin (Megadyptes antipodes) as endangered and the Humboldt penguin (Spheniscus humboldti) as vulnerable.

Some penguin species are now increasing in numbers. Scientists believe this is a result of the mid-20th century’s decline of Antarctic whales. Since whales and penguins both eat krill, penguins now have less competition in finding food. Penguin populations, however, are highly vulnerable to changes in climate and ocean temperature, including recent global warming. Penguins also are sensitive to depletion of local fish populations by humans.
