Peregrine falcons are birds of prey, meaning that they hunt and eat animals for food. Exceptionally fast in flight, they are able to catch other birds in the air. The peregrine is also called the duck hawk. Its scientific name is Falco peregrinus.

Peregrine falcons are found in many parts of the world. They are common in rocky country near water, in places where there are many other birds to prey upon. They prefer to roost and nest in high places, such as the cliffs along river gorges.

A peregrine falcon is bluish gray on the back and on the outer wings. The underside of a peregrine falcon is white or yellowish with black marks. Black marks also appear on the head and beak. The wingspan is large, about 3 feet (1 meter). The peregrine falcon is about 19 inches (48 centimeters) long and weighs about 2 pounds (1 kilogram); most females are larger than most males.

Peregrine falcons mainly hunt and eat other birds, such as pigeons and ducks. They often catch prey in the air after a fast chase. A peregrine falcon also hunts by flying high and then diving at prey. The peregrine falcon can dive at speeds of up to 200 miles (320 kilometers) per hour toward its prey. It kills the prey by hitting it with closed talons, or claws.

Peregrines do not construct elaborate nests. A rock ledge is usually sufficient. The female lays three or four reddish brown eggs at a time. The young leave the nest in five to six weeks.

Peregrines have been kept by people and trained for the sport of falconry since the Middle Ages. But peregrines have also been persecuted for killing homing pigeons and taking game birds. However, the most serious threat to the peregrine falcon in the 20th century was the pesticide DDT. When ingested with prey, DDT made peregrine eggshells so thin that the eggs broke before the chicks could hatch. During the 1950s and 1960s there were very few peregrines left in the wild. After DDT was banned (this took place in 1972 in the United States), the population recovered. As of 1999 the peregrine falcon is no longer considered to be an endangered species. Peregrines now nest in large cities, because tall buildings create a clifflike environment. Urban peregrines prey upon pigeons and other urban birds.


