Several kinds of beautifully colored birds of the Americas are called quetzals. The best known of these is the resplendent quetzal. The tail feathers of the male resplendent quetzal are about twice as long as the rest of the bird. The resplendent quetzal was held sacred by the ancient Aztec and Maya peoples. Today it is the national emblem of Guatemala.

Quetzals live in the warm parts of South America and Central America. The resplendent quetzal ranges from southern Mexico to Panama. This bird lives in the heavy tropical highland rain forests of the region. Some quetzals have been found in rain forests at heights of up to 10,000 feet (3,000 meters).

A quetzal’s body is about 14 inches (36 centimeters) long. The tail feathers can add well over 2 feet (61 centimeters) to the male’s total length. The feathers hang straight down when the bird is at rest. In addition to the tail, the male also has a crest of short feathers on its head to set it apart from the female. A quetzal’s beak is curved, broad, and short, with tiny bristles at the base. The legs are short and the feet are weak.

The feathers of a resplendent quetzal are mostly green. The lower breast and belly of the male are reddish. The female has a gray breast and is generally duller in color than the male. The green or blue-green tail has underparts that are white in the male and black and white in the female.

Quetzals are more often heard than seen. They make a soft, rather sad cooing sound. They are usually found alone, sitting motionless on a tree branch. Quetzals do not fly long distances. Adults feed mainly on fruit. They snatch the fruit off the stems of trees while in flight and then eat while perching on a nearby branch.

Quetzals nest in holes in trees, high above the forest floor. The female lays light blue eggs, usually two at a time. The male helps tend the eggs. The eggs hatch after about 18 days. Both parents feed the young birds insects and lizards.

Only the Aztec nobility were allowed to wear quetzal feathers. It is believed that the Aztecs snipped the feathers from the tails of living birds. In more recent times, however, hunters have killed quetzals for their feathers. An even bigger threat to the birds is the destruction of the forests where they live. Some countries have banned hunting of quetzals and protect the birds in national parks or reserves.

Guatemala’s unit of money is called the quetzal.
