 Ravens are heavy-billed, dark birds that are considered songbirds. Their voices, however, do not sound very musical, instead making a variety of noises, such as caws, croaks, and gurgles. Ravens are related to crows. The raven is larger than the crow and has a heavier bill and shaggier feathers, especially around the throat. The raven’s lustrous feathers also have a blue or purplish iridescence. Ravens, like crows, belong to the genus Corvus.

Formerly abundant throughout the Northern Hemisphere, the raven is now restricted to the wilder, undisturbed parts of its range. It is among the hardiest of birds, inhabiting the northern tundra and boreal forests as well as barren mountains and desert. Some species of ravens can be found in Africa, southern Asia, and Australia.

The common raven (C. corax) is the largest of the perching birds. It reaches a length of up to 26 inches (66 centimeters) and has a wingspan of more than 4 feet (1.3 meters). (Some magpies and the lyrebird exceed the raven in length, but their bodies are smaller.) The common raven is all black, while the white-necked raven (C. cryptoleucus) of western North America has white on its neck feathers. Other species have white or brown markings.

An intelligent bird, the raven has a large and varied vocabulary, including guttural croaks and gurglings. The bird is noisy and aggressive while eating; favorite meals include rodents, insects, grain, and birds’ eggs. In winter, especially, the raven is a scavenger and feeds on carrion, dead fish, and garbage. The common raven usually is solitary but may feed in small flocks.

The raven’s spectacular courtship flight involves soaring and all kinds of aerial acrobatics. The crudely made nest consists of coarse sticks and is usually lined with hair or shredded bark. The bulky structure can reach up to 5 feet (1.5 meters) in diameter and may be built on a cliff or the top of a large tree. The young remain in the nest for about a month.

Long before it was immortalized in Edgar Allan Poe’s poem “The Raven,” the bird was a near-universal symbol of dark prophecy—of death, pestilence, and disease. The raven’s cleverness and fearless habits, however, also won it a degree of admiration, as evidenced in its noble heraldic roles in the mythology of some peoples.
