 One of the best known of American birds is the robin. It nests from the limit of trees in northern Alaska and Canada to southern Mexico. Its musical warble, cheerily, cheer up, cheerily, cheerily, is one of the early signs of spring in the north. It seems to have little fear of people.

After its sunrise concert the robin begins to search the lawn for worms. It stands still, its black head cocked to one side. Suddenly it darts at the ground, tugs violently, and pulls out a worm. Because it tilts its head frequently and rapidly, the robin has often been thought to be listening to the ground for movement. Actually, the rapid head turning is to help the bird see better what may be moving near it. It eats quantities of insects too, but more than half its diet consists of fruits and berries.

Robins build their nests on the horizontal branches of trees, in porch vines, and in eaves. The nest is a bowl of mud, which the mother bird shapes with her breast by turning around and around. It is reinforced with coarse grass, leaves, and roots and lined with grass. A robin lays from four to six eggs of greenish blue, or robin’s-egg blue. There are two or three families a season. The parents defend their young with great courage and will unhesitatingly attack a prowling cat or a snake. The old males and young birds assemble at night in roosts, while the mothers remain on the nests with the latest broods.

Early in September, after the nesting season is over, robins gather in flocks and roam about in search of food. Then they start off for the south. A few hardy individuals winter in the north, taking refuge against storm and cold in deep evergreens and wooded swamps. The Southern states know robins chiefly as winter residents. Here their cheery song is seldom heard, and the damage they do to fruits and berries is so great that some farmers obtain licenses to shoot them. The robin is the state bird of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Connecticut.

Robins are about 10 inches (25 centimeters) long, with black heads, dark-gray upper parts, rusty-red breasts, yellow bills, and tails tipped with white at the outer corners. Females and young males are paler. Nestlings have the spotted breasts of the thrush family, Turdidae, to which robins belong. The scientific name is Turdus migratorius.
