robin, either of two species of thrushes (family Turdidae) distinguished by an orange or dull reddish breast. The American robin (Turdus migratorius), a large North American thrush, is one of the most familiar songbirds in the eastern United States. Early colonial settlers named it robin because its breast colour resembled that of a smaller thrush, the European robin (Erithacus rubecula).

The American robin is about 25 cm (10 inches) long and has gray-brown upperparts, a rusty breast, and white-tipped outer tail feathers. The birds inhabit deciduous forests but are also a familiar sight in American towns and cities. Most are highly migratory, spending the winter in flocks in the southern United States, though a few winter as far north as southern Canada. The American robin feeds on earthworms, insects, and berries. The nest, built of twigs, roots, grass, and paper with a firmly molded inner layer of mud, is placed in trees or on building ledges. Four to six bluish green eggs are incubated by the female for 12–14 days. The female incubates the eggs and the male obtains food for the young, who fly in 14–16 days. There may be two or three broods per season. The name robin is also applied to other New World thrushes of the genus Turdus.

The European robin, or robin redbreast, is a chat-thrush (subfamily Saxicolinae) that breeds throughout Europe, western Asia, and parts of North Africa. It is migratory in northern Europe but only partially so or sedentary farther south. It is a plump, small-billed bird, 14 cm (5.5 inches) long, with brownish olive upperparts, white belly, and rusty-orange face and breast. The European robin feeds mainly on insects. Its nest, built of leaves and moss and lined with feathers, is placed in a hole or cranny in walls, banks, and trees. The five to six whitish eggs are incubated for 13 to 14 days by the female, who is sometimes fed by the male. The young fly in 12–14 days, and then a second brood is reared. The European robin sings all year round, uttering high-pitched warbles.

The name robin is also applied to a dozen other chat-thrushes in the genera Erithacus and Tarsiger, as well as to a few other related species, notably the Indian robin (Saxicoloides fulicata), which is about 15 cm (6 inches) long, with black plumage set off by a white shoulder patch and reddish patches on the underparts.

The term robin is frequently placed in combination with other names—e.g., bush-robin, scrub-robin, robin-chat (see thrush), magpie-robin, Pekin robin (see Leiothrix). Certain unrelated ground-feeding, thrushlike flycatchers of the family Muscicapidae, of Australia and New Guinea, are also called robins. Familiar in Australia is the scarlet robin (Petroica multicolor), a species 11 cm (4.5 inches) tall, marked with black, white, and bright scarlet.
