The small shorebirds called sandpipers are often seen running up and down beaches. Sandpipers belong to the scientific family Scolopacidae, which also includes the snipes, sanderlings, and woodcocks. They were named for their thin, piping cries.

Most sandpipers live along the edges of seas, lakes, marshes, and mudflats. A few types may be seen in open fields. Sandpipers normally spend the warm months nesting and breeding north of the equator. Some types live as far north as Siberia and the Alaskan Arctic region. In autumn, sandpipers usually migrate south in large groups. Many fly all the way to South America, Australia, New Zealand, or other places south of the equator, where the seasons are reversed and summer is just beginning

Sandpipers are small to medium-sized birds, about 6–12 inches (15–30 centimeters) long. They have fairly long bills and legs, long, narrow wings, and short necks and tails. Most species, or kinds, of sandpipers look very similar to one other, which makes it difficult to tell them apart. The feathers on their upper bodies are mostly brown, gray, and black. The underparts are usually shades of white or cream.

A few species of sandpipers are slightly more colorful. They include the purple sandpiper, the green sandpiper, and the red-backed sandpiper (or dunlin). Some sandpipers grow brighter colors for the spring breeding season. The white-rumped sandpiper, for example, is usually gray but turns a rusty color in spring.

Sandpipers search for food while running through mudflats or darting in and out of the lapping water on beaches. They use their long bills to pull up crayfish, crabs, snails, insects, and worms. Some sandpipers have unusual habits. The common sandpiper, for example, wags its tail from side to side, and the spotted sandpiper bobs its tail up and down.

Sandpipers usually make a simple nest in a hollow on the ground. The nest may be either in the open or hidden by tall grass. The solitary sandpiper is unusual in that it uses old tree nests of other birds. A female sandpiper usually lays four spotted eggs. Young sandpipers are active and have soft, downy feathers. The father usually has a bigger role than the mother in caring for them. A few weeks after hatching, the young birds are ready to fly.
