 One of the world’s best known and probably most abundant small birds is the house, or English, sparrow. It is found worldwide around homes and on farms. A native of the British Isles, Eurasia, and northern Africa, it is more robust than the native New World sparrows. The house sparrow was introduced into North America in the early 1850s, and within a century it had spread across the continent.

The house sparrow is a 5 1/2-inch (14-centimeter) brown bird with gray underparts, and the male has a black bib. The birds eat seeds and small insects. The nest, often built in house eaves, is an untidy bundle of straw, twigs, and feathers.

Another immigrant to the New World is the Eurasian tree sparrow. Originally introduced in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1870, it retreated to rural areas after the local introduction of the more aggressive house sparrow. The tree sparrow remains common, however, around St. Louis. Both sexes are similar in appearance and can be distinguished from the house sparrow by their brown-red crowns and black ear patches.

Many New World birds of the finch family are called sparrows, including the chipping sparrow, a little bird with a reddish brown cap. It is named for its song, a series of high-pitched “chips” repeated slowly or trilled so rapidly that the bird may be mistaken for a cricket. It is found in open grassy woodlands and is one of the smallest and tamest of the sparrows.

Two master singers are the song and fox sparrows, found in brush or woodland thickets. Both birds have heavily streaked breasts with a dark spot in the center. The song sparrow is one of the best known of all North American birds. The fox sparrow is greatly admired for its melodious, flutelike song.

The savannah and vesper sparrows are finely streaked birds with notched tails. The vesper sparrow is named for its evening song. Other noted singers are the white-crowned and white-throated sparrows, larger species with black-and-white striped crowns. Their sad, whistling songs sound somewhat alike.

The classification of sparrows is unclear. The Old World sparrows are generally placed in the weaverbird family, Ploceidae, but are sometimes classified as a separate family, Passeridae. The scientific name of the house sparrow is Passer domesticus; the Eurasian tree sparrow is P. montanus.

The New World sparrows are generally classed in the finch family, Fringillidae, but may be assigned to the family Emberizidae. The chipping sparrow is Spizella passerina; the song sparrow, Melospiza melodia; the fox sparrow, Passerella iliaca; the savannah sparrow, Passerculus sandwichensis; the vesper sparrow, Pooecetes gramineus; the white-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia leucophrys; and the white-throated sparrow, Z. albicollis.
