 The large birds called storks have long necks and legs. They make up the scientific family Ciconiidae and are related to herons, flamingos, and ibises. In some parts of Europe the white stork is believed to bring such good luck that people fix platforms and baskets to their rooftops to encourage the birds to nest there. When a child is born, some people say that the parents have had a “visit from the stork.” It is largely because of these myths that these storks have been saved from destruction.

Most storks are found in Africa, Asia, or Europe. One species can also be found in Australia, and three species are native to the Americas. Storks generally live in warm regions, and most are wading birds that live near water.

Storks range in height from about 2 feet (0.6 meter) to more than 5 feet (1.5 meters). Their pointed bills are long and heavy, and all or part of their head and neck may be bare of feathers and brightly colored. They fly, alternately flapping and soaring, with legs trailing and necks outstretched. Most storks feed on small animals that they catch in shallow water or in fields.

Storks lack a fully developed syrinx, or vocal organ, and so have no voice, but they may grunt, hiss, or, when excited, clatter their bills loudly. During the mating season the male stork performs a remarkable stiff-legged dance, rattling its bill and leaping from the ground with extended wings flapping. The stork’s nest, a large platform of twigs, is built by both sexes, usually in trees or on rock ledges. The female typically lays three to six chalky-white eggs, which both parents incubate. They hatch in about five weeks.

There are 17 species of stork. The white stork (Ciconia ciconia) of Europe and Asia lives largely on dry ground. Its plumage is accented with black wing quills, and it has a red beak and legs.

Unlike most other storks, the adjutant stork (Leptoptilus dubius) of India and southeastern Asia is primarily a scavenger, eating carrion. This large gray-and-white bird gets its military title from its stiff, measured strut.

The marabou (Leptoptilos crumeniferus) of Africa is the largest stork, and it, too, eats carrion. It is mainly gray and white. The black stork (Ciconia nigra) of Europe, Asia, and Africa has a white belly and a red bill and legs. The saddle-billed stork (Ephippiorhynchus senegalensis) of tropical Africa has a small yellow plate mounted atop its black-and-red banded bill.

The jabiru (Jabiru mycteria) ranges from Mexico to Argentina. It is one of the largest American flying birds, reaching lengths of 4 1/2 feet (1.4 meters). Its plumage is white, and its bare head is black, with a reddish ring around the base of the neck.

The only native North American stork is the wood stork (Mycteria americana), which ranges from the southern United States to Argentina. It is white with black wings and tail and a naked black head and neck. Wood storks have a distinctive method of group feeding. They gather in shallow water and each bird stirs the water ahead of it with its foot. When a fish or frog is disturbed and tries to flee, the nearest bird snaps it up with its bill.
