The largest of the waterfowl (called wildfowl in Europe), swans are graceful in the air and stately on the water. These birds are especially known for having a long neck. They migrate in diagonal formation or V-formation at great heights, and no other waterfowl moves as fast on the water or in the air. Swans belong to the family Anatidae (order Anseriformes), which also includes the ducks and geese. Most swans are classified in the genus Cygnus.

Male swans are called cobs, and females are called pens. Cobs and pens look alike, with heavy bodies and big feet as well as similar coloring. Swans eat seeds, roots, small invertebrates, and fish eggs. They feed on aquatic plants by dipping their bills beneath the water. Swans utter a variety of sounds from the windpipe; even the mute swan (C. olor), the least vocal species, often hisses, makes soft snoring sounds, or grunts sharply.

Swans are sociable except in breeding season. Like geese, they typically mate for life. Courtship involves mutual bill dipping or head-to-head posturing. The pen incubates, on average, six pale unmarked eggs on a heap of vegetation while the cob keeps close guard; in some species he takes his turn at brooding. The young, called cygnets, emerge short-necked and thickly downed. Though capable of running and swimming a few hours after hatching, they are carefully tended for several months; in some species they may ride about on their mother’s back. Immature birds have mottled gray or brown feathers for two or more years. Swans mature in the third or fourth year and live perhaps 20 years in the wild and 50 years or more in captivity.

Five of the seven or eight species of swans have solid-white feathers and black legs and make their breeding grounds in Arctic regions. They migrate southward into temperate areas during the winter. The mute swan is the common swan of Europe. Its bill is orange-red with a black knob on the upper bill, near the eyes. There are two species of swans native to North America, the trumpeter swan (C. cygnus buccinator) and the whistling swan (C. columbianus columbianus). The trumpeter swan, named for its far-carrying low-pitched call and for having an all-black bill, is the largest of all waterfowl. This bird can reach a length of some 6 feet (1.8 meters), with a 10-foot (3-meter) wingspan. The trumpeter swan, however, weighs less than the mute swan, which at 50 pounds (23 kilograms) is the heaviest flying bird.

Three species of swans live in the Southern Hemisphere: the black-necked swan (C. melancoryphus) and the coscoroba (Coscoroba coscoroba) of South America and the black swan (Cygnus atratus) of Australia. The black-necked swan is an especially bad-tempered but beautiful bird, with a white body, black neck and head, and prominent red fleshy outgrowth on the bill. The coscoroba is an all-white bird that is usually considered the smallest swan. The black swan is a handsome bird with soot-black plumage and a coral bill.

