Among the most common slender, graceful water birds of ocean and coastal zones distributed worldwide are terns. The largest number of species is found in the Pacific Ocean. Many terns travel long distances, the most notable being the Arctic tern (Sterna paradisaea). The Arctic tern breeds in the southerly reaches of the Arctic and winters in Antarctic regions, thus making the longest annual migration of any bird. About 40 species of terns constitute the subfamily Sterninae, of the family Laridae, which also includes the gulls.

Terns range in length from about 8 to 22 inches (20 to 55 centimeters). Compared with gulls, they are more slender, shorter legged, and longer winged. They range in color from white to black and white to almost entirely black. The bill of various species may be black, red, or yellow, while the feet are red or black. Their feet are webbed. Most species have long and pointed wings, forked tails, and sharply pointed bills.

Terns sometimes eat insects, but the bulk of their diet consists of crustaceans and small fish, which they catch by diving through the air and plunging into the water. Terns are sociable birds, nesting in colonies usually on the ground on islands. Sometimes they form breeding colonies of millions of individuals. Most species lay two or three eggs, although a few species lay only one egg. In some parts of the world tern eggs are gathered and eaten by humans.

The most typical terns are the approximately 30 species of the genus Sterna. These birds have a forked tail, black cap or crest, and pale body. The common tern (S. hirundo) lives in all parts of the Northern Hemisphere as well as in South America and Africa. It has a pearl-gray body, black cap, red legs, and a red bill with a black tip. The black tern, S. nigra (sometimes Chlidonias niger), with a black head and underparts (white below in winter) and gray wings and back, nests in inland marshes and prairies as well as along the coasts; it is also called a marsh tern because of its habitat. The least, or little, tern (S. albifrons), at under 10 inches (25 centimeters) long, is the smallest tern. It breeds on sandy coasts and river sandbars in temperate to tropical regions worldwide except South America. The sooty tern (S. fuscata) has a white forehead and is otherwise black above and white below. It breeds in huge, noisy colonies on oceanic islands in warm regions.

In addition, there are five species of noddy terns, or noddies, belonging to the genus Anous. Noddies, named for their head-nodding displays, are tropical birds with wedge-shaped or only slightly forked tails. A distinct type of tern, the Inca tern (Larosterna inca), of Peru and northern Chile, bears distinctive white plumes on the side of the head.

