Introduction

Among the many striking birds of the American tropics, the toucans stand out because of their enormous, brightly colored bills. There are about 41 species of toucan, which make up the scientific family Ramphastidae. They are related to the woodpeckers. The name toucan comes from tucano, which is what the birds are called in some Brazilian languages.

Where Toucans Live

Toucans live in the tropical forests of Central and South America. Most are found high in the trees. A few types live in the Andes and other mountain ranges of South America. Toucans do not migrate, but some mountain species do move up and down the slopes when the weather changes.

Physical Features

Toucans can grow to a length of 24 inches (60 centimeters). The smaller toucans are known as aracaris and toucanets. The better-known birds of this group include the emerald toucanet, which reaches a length of about 12–14 inches (30–36 centimeters).

A toucan has short, rounded wings and a long tail. Its most outstanding feature, however, is its huge bill, which can make up one-third of the bird’s total length. The bill looks like a heavy burden for the bird to carry. Actually, though, it is made up of very lightweight bone covered with keratin—the same material that makes up human fingernails. In many toucans, the bill is brightly colored in shades of green, red, white, and yellow. These colors help distinguish toucan species from one another. In fact, some members of the toucan family have names that describe the colors of their bills. Among them are the fiery-billed aracari and the yellow-ridged toucan. The bill also helps the toucan to scare away other birds.

Apart from their bills, many toucans have similar body patterns and coloration. Most have black feathers and splashes of bright color, especially on the chest. The keel-billed toucan, for example, is mainly black with yellow on the face, throat, and chest, bright red under the tail, and multicolored markings on the bill.

Behaviour

Toucans are mainly fruit eaters, but they will also eat large insects, snakes, frogs, and lizards. Sometimes they invade the nests of songbirds and eat eggs or even young birds. A toucan grabs food with the tip of its bill and throws its head back to move the food toward the throat. The sawlike edge of the bill helps the bird tear apart large fruit.

Toucans are among the noisiest birds in the forest. They make loud barks, bugling calls, and harsh croaks. Larger toucans sometimes raise a commotion that attracts other toucans to trees with good fruit.

Reproduction

Toucans often nest in groups, or colonies. They use natural holes in trees or an abandoned woodpecker nest. Smaller toucans will sometimes take over a woodpecker nest that has just been built. A female toucan lays two to four glossy white eggs, which hatch in about 16 days. Chicks are born with closed eyes, bare skin, and a bill that is wide but not long. The parents care for them for about 45 days, until they are ready to fly. Family groups may stay together even after that.


