 Turkeys are large birds that are found in the wild and also raised for food. There are two species of turkey, which are usually classified in the family Phasianidae, along with pheasants, quail, partridges, and chickens. The best known species of turkey is the common turkey, a native game bird of North America that has been widely domesticated for the table. Its scientific name is Meleagris gallopavo. The other species is the ocellated turkey (M. ocellata). It is found in Central America.

The common turkey was probably domesticated by the Indians of Mexico before Europeans arrived in the area. Spanish explorers first took the bird to Spain about 1519. From Spain turkeys spread throughout Europe, reaching England in 1541. When the bird became popular in England, people began calling it a turkey-cock. They had formerly called guinea fowl of Islamic (or “Turkish”) lands turkey-cock. English colonists then introduced European-bred strains of the common turkey to eastern North America in the 17th century. Until about 1935, people mainly raised turkeys for their colored plumage. After that time they were bred for their meat.

Today the wild common turkey is found in Mexico and in the southeastern and southwestern United States. The birds live in deep woods, in brushlands, and on the borders of swamps. Common turkeys are basically dark with iridescent bronze and green plumage. Adult males have a naked, bumpy head that is normally bright red. When the bird is excited, its head turns to white overlaid with bright blue. A long, red fleshy ornament (called a snood) grows from the forehead over the bill. A fleshy flap of skin called a wattle descends from the throat. A tuft of coarse, black, hairlike feathers (known as a beard) projects from the breast.

The male common turkey is also called a gobbler or a tom. It may be 50 inches (130 centimeters) long and weigh 22 pounds (10 kilograms). However, on average most turkeys weigh less. Female turkeys, or hens, generally weigh only half as much as the males. Domesticated strains of the common turkey, developed for their fine-tasting flesh, may be much heavier. Roast turkey in many European countries has long been a customary Christmas dish. In the United States the bird is especially associated with the holiday of Thanksgiving.

Wild common turkeys do not pair in couples as many birds do, but the males have flocks of females. To attract females, the male spreads the tail, droops the wings, struts about, and utters rapid gobbling sounds. Each female hides her nest on the ground under weeds and thickets. It is a slight hollow lined with soft plants. The female lays 8 to 15 eggs, which are white dotted with reddish brown. The female takes care of the eggs, which hatch in about 28 days. The chicks leave the nest shortly after hatching. During the day the birds wander through the woods, feeding on insects, seeds, berries, and tender plants. Occasionally they eat lizards or frogs. At night their favorite roosts are in trees overhanging water. Wild turkeys usually walk or run to move about, but they are capable of flying.

The ocellated turkey is smaller than the common turkey. The ocellated turkey has a blue head with reddish yellow bumps. The feathers are bright-tipped, almost like a peacock. In addition to a long bill wattle, the ocellated turkey has a yellow-tipped knob on the crown. The ocellated turkey lives only in the wild.
