Vultures are large birds of prey; however, they rarely hunt for live animals, preferring to eat carrion (dead flesh) and garbage. Vultures are divided into the New World and the Old World vultures. There are seven New World species, including condors, and 15 Old World species, including the lammergeier and griffons. Both the New World and Old World vultures belong to the family Falconiformes. Although many members of the two groups appear similar, they are only distantly related.

Vultures live predominantly in the tropics and subtropics. New World vultures are found, as is indicated by their name, only in the Americas, while the Old World vultures inhabit Europe, Asia, and Africa. Although vultures are widely distributed, they are absent from Australia and most oceanic islands. Most of these birds inhabit open country.

All the New World vultures and some of the Old World vultures have bald heads. Most vultures can go for long periods without food, an adaptation to a feast-or-famine scavenging lifestyle. In some species the beak is exceptionally strong and heavy for tearing hide, muscle, and even bone. Eyesight in all vultures is well developed, as is the sense of smell in the turkey vulture. Old World vultures have relatively strong feet, but New World vultures have flat, weak feet that are poorly adapted for grasping.

Most vultures consume carrion, garbage, and even excrement, but rarely do they descend upon live animals. A few occasionally take helpless prey such as lambs and tortoises or, in the case of Andean condors, newborn calves. Vultures may remain aloft for hours, soaring gracefully on long, broad wings. When one bird descends to a dead or dying animal, others may be attracted from miles away. When feeding, vultures maintain a strict social order based on body size and strength of beak. Smaller vultures must wait for the scraps left behind by the larger, dominant species. Even large vultures, however, give way to nearly all mammalian competitors, including jackals, hyenas, and coyotes.

Old World vultures build large stick platform nests in trees or on cliffs, sometimes in large colonies. Most of the larger Old World vultures lay only a single egg. New World vultures do not build nests but lay their eggs in natural cavities in cliffs or trees. The smaller New World vultures lay two eggs and incubate them for just over a month. The largest species lay only a single egg that may take nearly two months to hatch. The young mature more slowly than those of typical birds of prey.
New World Vultures

The New World vultures are quite different from the Old World vultures. The New World vultures belong to a separate family, Cathartidae. Some scientists believe that these vultures may be more closely related to storks (order Ciconiiformes, family Ciconiidae) than to other birds of prey and do not belong in the order Falconiformes; other scientists disagree.

The California condor (Gymnogyps californianus) is perhaps the best-known New World vulture, unfortunately because it is one of the most endangered. With a wingspan of nearly 10 feet (3 meters), it is the largest flying bird of North America. This bird’s range once included much of the southwestern United States as well as Mexico, but by the early 1980s there were fewer than 25 of the birds left in the wild. In the late 1980s the last of the wild California condors were taken into captivity to be protected and bred. Beginning in 1992 many California condors that were born and raised in captivity were released into the wild, and in 2002 the first egg to be laid in the wild by captive-raised condors hatched. By mid-2006 the total California condor population reached 289. The related Andean condor (Vultur gryphus) of South America has a 10.5-foot (3.2-meter) wingspan. After the albatross, it is the world’s largest flying bird.

The turkey vulture (Cathartes aura) is the most widespread New World vulture, breeding from Canada southward to the southern tip of South America. Northern populations are migratory. Turkey vultures are small brownish black birds with red heads as adults (dark gray as juveniles) and a wingspan of nearly 6.6 feet (2 meters). They are usually the first to find carcasses, owing to their well-developed sense of smell, but they are more timid than other vultures and retreat while other species feed.

Other notable New World vultures include the black vulture (Coragyps atratus), which is sometimes called a black buzzard or, inappropriately, a carrion crow. The black vulture, the most abundant vulture species of all, is a resident of the tropics and subtropics that often wanders far into temperate regions. It is a chunky black bird about 24 inches (60 centimeters) long, with a very short tail, short wings, a bare black head, and a feathered hindneck.

The king vulture (Sarcoramphus papa) is the most colorful vulture. The head and neck are red, yellow, and bluish; the eyes are white with red eye-rings; the body is buff above and white below; and the neck fringe is gray. King vultures have a body that is about 31 inches (80 centimeters) long and a wingspan of about 6.6 feet (2 meters). These birds range from southern Mexico to Argentina, where they soar singly or in pairs over tropical forests.

Old World Vultures

The Old World vultures belong to the order Falconiformes like the New World vultures. The Old World vultures, however, are classified in the family Accipitridae, which also includes eagles, hawks, and buzzards.

Of the Old World vultures, the cinereous vulture, sometimes called the black vulture (Aegypius monachus), is one of the largest flying birds. It is about 3.3 feet (1 meter) long and 27.5 pounds (12.5 kilograms) in weight, with a wingspan of about 8.9 feet (2.7 meters). The cinereous vulture is entirely black with very broad wings and a short tail. It ranges through southern Europe and parts of Asia, nesting in tall trees. Many of these regions are also inhabited by the slightly smaller bearded vulture, or lammergeier (Gypaetus barbatus).

The Egyptian vulture (Neophron percnopterus), also called Pharaoh’s chicken, is a small Old World vulture about 24 inches (60 centimeters) long. It is white with black flight feathers, a bare face, and a cascading mane of feathers. This vulture’s range is northern and eastern Africa, southern Europe, and the Middle East to Afghanistan and India.

Other Old World vultures include the common griffon (Gyps fulvus), or Eurasian griffon, of northwestern Africa, the Spanish highlands, southern Russia, and the Balkans. Gray above and reddish brown with white streaking below, it is about 3.3 feet (1 meter) long.

The lappet-faced vulture (Torgos tracheliotus), sometimes called the eared, or Nubian, vulture, inhabits arid Africa. It is black and brown above with white down on the underparts. Large folds of skin, called lappets, hang from the sides of its bare head. The face is pink or reddish. The palm-nut vulture (Gypohierax angolensis) lives in western and central Africa. It is about 20 inches (50 centimeters) long and has a bare orange face and yellow beak. It is unusual in being primarily vegetarian, although it sometimes eats crustaceans and dead fish.
