Warblers are small songbirds that are found in gardens, woodlands, and marshes. These birds belong predominantly to the Sylviidae (sometimes considered a subfamily, Sylviinae, of the family Muscicapidae), Parulidae, and Peucedramidae families of the order Passeriformes. The warblers are split into two groups: the Old World warblers and the New World warblers, which are also called wood warblers.

There are almost 350 species of Old World warblers belonging to the family Sylviidae. These are related to the thrushes and the Old World flycatchers. The Old World warblers occur mainly from Europe and Asia to Australia and Africa, but a few live in the Americas. Many warblers of Europe are familiar enough to have received special names, such as the blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla), the whitethroat (S. communis), and the chiffchaff (Phylloscopus collybita).

Old World warblers are rather drab, with green, olive, brown, buff, and black the predominant colors. They are mostly small birds, ranging from 3.5 to 10 inches (9 to 26 centimeters) long. Their slender bills are adapted for gathering insects from foliage. Their nests vary from simple cups to domed structures; the nests may be made in trees, bushes, or grass or may be hidden in the ground. The tailorbirds (Orthotomus) of India sew leaves together into purse-shaped containers for their nests. Old World warblers’ eggs are usually speckled, and the young are cared for by both parents.

The New World warblers, or woodwarblers, of the family Parulidae comprise about 120 species of small songbirds. These birds are closely related to the New World tanagers. They take their name, however, from their superficial resemblance in form, structure, and habits to the distantly related Old World warblers. The woodwarblers are mainly found in North and Central America and live in forest, brush, or swampy grass country. They are small birds, ranging up to 7 inches (18 centimeters) in length, and are more brightly colored than Old World warblers. Many woodwarblers have weak, lisping songs, but a few have loud voices. Their feeding and nesting habits resemble those of Old World warblers.
