woodpecker, any of about 180 species of birds that constitute the subfamily Picinae (true woodpeckers) of the family Picidae (order Piciformes), noted for probing for insects in tree bark and for chiseling nest holes in deadwood. Woodpeckers occur nearly worldwide, except in the region of Australia and New Guinea, but are most abundant in South America and Southeast Asia. Most woodpeckers are resident, but a few temperate-zone species, such as the North American yellow-bellied sapsucker (Sphyrapicus varius) and the flicker (genus Colaptes), are migratory.
Woodpecker tapping for insects.

Most woodpeckers spend their entire lives in trees, spiraling up the trunks in search of insects; only the few ground-feeding forms are capable of perching on horizontal branches, as passerine birds do. Most woodpeckers eat insects, but some (especially Melanerpes species) feed on fruits and berries, and sapsuckers regularly feed on sap from certain trees in some seasons. In spring the loud calls of woodpeckers, often augmented by drumming on hollow wood or occasionally on metal, are the sounds of males holding territories; at other seasons woodpeckers are usually silent. Most are not social, tending rather to be solitary or to travel in pairs.

The acorn woodpecker (M. formicivorus) is about 20 cm (8 inches) long and is found from the deciduous woodlands of western North America south to Colombia. It depends on acorns for winter food, storing a supply in holes it drills in the bark of trees. The red-headed woodpecker (M. erythrocephalus) is roughly the same size (19–23 cm [7.5–9 inches]) as the acorn woodpecker, but it is sparsely distributed in open woodlands, farmland, and orchards of temperate North America east of the Rocky Mountains.

Well-known species of Dendrocopos include the downy woodpecker (D. pubescens), only about 15 cm (6 inches) long and inhabiting the woodlands and gardens of temperate North America; the great spotted woodpecker (D. major), about 23 cm (9 inches) long and found from the forests and gardens of western temperate Eurasia south to North Africa; and the hairy woodpecker (D. villosus), which is 20–25 cm (8–9.8 inches) long and found in temperate North America.

Dryocopus includes two well-known species: the black woodpecker (D. martius), which is some 46 cm (18 inches) long and is found in coniferous and beech woodlands of temperate Eurasia, and the pileated woodpecker (D. pileatus), which is some 40–47 cm (15.5–18.25 inches) in size and inhabits mature forests of much of temperate North America.

Two species of three-toed woodpeckers make up the genus Picoides: the northern three-toe (P. tridactylus), which ranges across the subarctic Northern Hemisphere and south in some mountains, and the black-backed three-toe (P. arcticus), found across forested central Canada.

The crimson-backed woodpecker (Chrysocolaptes lucidus) is common in open woodlands from India to the Philippine Islands. The green woodpecker (Picus viridis) ranges throughout the woodlands of temperate Eurasia and south to North Africa. The deciduous forests of the southeastern United States are the habitat of the red-bellied woodpecker (Centurus carolinus).

The ivory-billed woodpecker (Campephilus principalis), noted for its size (45 cm [18 inches] long) and beauty, was historically found in Cuba and the southern United States. Although listed as critically endangered, it was believed to be extinct. In 2005, however, researchers announced that the bird had been sighted in eastern Arkansas. A subspecies, the Cuban ivory-billed woodpecker (C. principalis bairdii), is thought to be extinct, and a related species, the imperial woodpecker (C. imperialis) of Mexico, is critically endangered and possibly extinct.
